## PBS 162 of X — jq: Altering Arrays & Dictionaries

TO DO

## Matching Podcast Episode

TO DO

## Installment Resources

* The instalment ZIP file — [pbs162.zip](https://github.com/bartificer/programming-by-stealth/raw/master/instalmentZips/pbs162.zip) TO CREATE

## PBS 161 Challenge Solution

The Challenge set at the end of the previous instalment was to clean up the Nobel Prizes data set we have been using in this series in the following ways:

1. Add a boolean key named `awarded` to every prize dictionary to indicate whether or not it was awarded.
2. Ensure all prize dictionaries have a `laureates` array. It should be empty for prizes that were not awarded.
3. Add a boolean key named `organisation` to each laureate dictionary, indicating whether or not the laureate is an organisation rather than a person.
4. Add a key named `displayName` to each laureate dictionary. For people, it should contain their first & last names, and for organisations, just the organisation name.

You'll find the sample solution in the file `pbs161-challengeSolution.jq` in the instalment ZIP:

```jq
# Sanitise the the Nobel Prizes data set as published by the Nobel Prize
# Committee to make it easier to process by normalising some existing
# fields and adding some additional ones.
# Input:    JSON as published by the Nobel Committee
# Output:   a dictionary indexed by a single key prizes containing an
#           array of dictionaries, one for each Nobel Prize
.prizes |= [
    # explode the prizes
    .[]

    # add an 'awarded' key to each prize
    | .awarded = (has("laureates"))

    # ensure all prizes have a laureates array
    | .laureates //= []

    # descend into the laureats arrays
    | .laureates |= [
        # explode the laureats
        .[]

        # add an organisation key
        | .organisation = (has("surname") | not)

        # add a displayName key
        | .displayName = ([.firstname, .surname // empty] | join(" "))
    ]
]
```

You can run the filter with the command:

```sh
jq -f pbs161-challengeSolution.jq NobelPrizes.json
```

The first thing I want to draw your attention to is the pattern of using the basic *update assignment* operator `|=` to update the value of the `prizes` array within the top-level dictionary, and the `laureates` arrays in each prize dictionary.

Because we're doing an update assignment, the value for `.` on the right-hand side of the operator is the current array, since that's what's being updated. We need to replace the array with a new array of updated dictionaries, so we start the filter chain for calculating those new values by exploding the current array, and we wrap the entire filter chain inside square braces to re-assemble the updated pieces back into an array.

Secondly, note that we use the *simple assignment* operator `=` to add the entirely new keys (`awarded` in the prize dictionaries, and `organisation` and `displayName` in the laureate dictionaries).

Next, note the use of the *alternate assignment* operator `//=` to default the `laureates` array to an empty array when it's not present, while leaving it intact when it is.

Finally, note the importance of making these changes in the correct order — we could not use the absence of a `laureates` array to detect an un-awarded prize after we default it to an empty array!

## Altering Arrays

Now that we've seen how to alter strings, let's take a look at way of transforming arrays.

### Re-Ordering Arrays (`sort` & `reverse`)

Let's start with the simplest type of array transformation — re-orderings.

The simplest re-ordering is a straight forward reversing, and jq provides just that with the `reverse` function:

```sh
jq -nc '[1, 2, 3] | reverse' # outputs [3,2,1]
```

Then of course we have array sorting.

When you have an array with simple values the built-in `sort` function will generally do what you want.

The function requires an array as input, and it will first group elements by type, starting with any `null` elements, then any booleans, then numbers, then strings, then arrays, and finally dictionaries. Within each grouping it will then perform the most sensible sorting, `false` before `true` for Booleans, numeric sorting for numbers, and alphabetic (lexical) sorting for strings. (Note that the rules for sorting arrays and dictionaries exist, but are out of the scope of this series).

Let's see the `sort` function in action:

```sh
# numbers
jq -nc '[1, 4, 3] | sort' # outputs [1,3,4]

# strings
jq -nc '["popcorn", "waffles",  "pancakes"] | sort' 
# outputs ["pancakes","popcorn","waffles"]

# mixed types
jq -nc '[42, true, 11, "waffles", false,  "pancakes"] | sort'
# outputs [false,true,11,42,"pancakes","waffles"]
```

When dealing with arrays containing more complicated elements like other arrays or dictionaries, you probably want to specify your own rule for sorting, you can do this with th `sort_by` function. It takes as an argument a filter, and that filter will be applied to each array element, and the elements will be sorted based on the results of applying the filter. Usually the filter is simply a dictionary key.

For example, we can re-order our menu (from the `menu.js` file in the instalment ZIP), with:

```sh
jq 'sort_by(.price)' menu.json
```

This outputs:

```json
[
  {
    "name": "pancakes",
    "price": 3.10,
    "stock": 43
  },
  {
    "name": "hotdogs",
    "price": 5.99,
    "stock": 143
  },
  {
    "name": "waffles",
    "price": 7.50,
    "stock": 14
  }
]
```

As you can see, the array is now sorted by price.

### Adding and Removing Elements with the  `+` & `-` Operators

As mentioned earlier, the `+` operator has been overloaded to perform a useful action when both inputs are arrays — it merges them into a new bigger array:

```sh
# Note: -n for no input & -c for compact output
jq -nc '[1, 2] + [3, 4]' # outputs [1,2,3,4]
```

While the `-` operator is not overloaded for strings, it is overloaded for arrays, and can be used create a new array with elements removed. The array to the left of the `-` is treated as the original array, and the elements in the array to the right of the `-` are removed from the original array, if present, to create the output array.

```sh
jq -nc '[1, 2, 3, 4] - [4, 5]' # outputs [1,2,3]
```

### Array Deduplication

When you start adding arrays together it's easy to end up with duplucates that you may well not want. The jq language provides two useful functions for removing them.

Firstly, the simple `unique` function returns the input array sorted with any duplicated elements removed. The input must be an array. For exmaple:

```sh
jq -nc '[4, 1, 4, 3, 2] | unique' # outputs [1,2,3,4]
```

If you need a more complex definition of 'uniqueness' you can use the `unique_by` function to supply your own filter as an argument. The output array will only contain one element which the filter evaluates to a given value. If multiple elements evaluate to the same value, one will be kept, but there's no guarantee as to which one it will be. Also note that the elements in the output array will be sorted based on the result of the filter.

As a somewhat contrived example, we can make our menu (from `menu.json` above) unique by length of name. Before we do, let's compute the lengths see what results we expect, we can do that with:

```sh
jq '.[] | .name | length' menu.json
```

This shows that hotdogs and waffles have 7 letters, and pancakes 8. We would expect to always get pancakes in our answer, but only one of waffles or hotdogs when we make the menu unique by name. Let's try:

```sh
jq 'unique_by(.name | length)' menu.json
```

This gives us the output:

```json
[
  {
    "name": "hotdogs",
    "price": 5.99,
    "stock": 143
  },
  {
    "name": "pancakes",
    "price": 3.10,
    "stock": 43
  }
]
```

As expected, we get one item with a name of length 7, the one with a name of length 8, because the items are sorted on the result of the filter as well as deduplicated based on it.

### Flattening Nested Arrays

When assembling an array from multiple sources you may end up with an array of arrays when you actually wanted a single unified array. This is where the built-in `flatten` function comes in.

The `flatten` function takes an array as in input, and if it contains other arrays, it replaces them with their entries in the output array. The funtion applies this logic recursively, so you if your array contains arrays which contain arrays, it will still flatten them all out to a single array of all the values.

```sh
jq -nc '[1, [2, 3], [4, [5, 6]]] | flatten'
# outputs [1,2,3,4,5,6]
```

By default the flatten function will keep recursing down into all nested arrays, but you can pass an optional argument to limit how deep it goes. To see what this means, let's repeat our above example with limits of 2 and 1:

```sh
# limit to a depth of 2
# arrays in the input array, and arrays in arrays in the input array
jq -nc '[1, [2, 3], [4, [5, 6]]] | flatten(2)'
# outputs [1,2,3,4,5,6]

# limit to a depth of 1
# arrays in the input array only
jq -nc '[1, [2, 3], [4, [5, 6]]] | flatten(1)'
# outputs [1,2,3,4,[5,6]]
```

## Dictionary Manipulation

### Adding and Removing Keys

As mentioned earlier, the `+` operators is overloaded for handling dicrtionaries. When two dictionaries are added together, a new dictionary is created containing the keys and values from both. If both input dictionaries define a value for the same key, the value from the dictionary on the right of the `+` operator is used.

If the dictionaries contain dictionaries, a recursive merge can be done by using the `*` operator instead of the `+` operator.

You might imagine key could comehow be removed with an overloaded subtraction operator, but alas not, we need to use the built-in `del` function for that. This function requires a dictionary as the input, and a key path as an argument. For example, we could remove the stock key from each item in our menu (`menu.js` from the instalment ZIP) with:

```sh
jq '.[] | del(.stock)' menu.json
```

Which returns:

```json
{
  "name": "hotdogs",
  "price": 5.99
}
{
  "name": "pancakes",
  "price": 3.10
}
{
  "name": "waffles",
  "price": 7.50
}
```

Note we expoloded the array in this example, so we now have a list of separate output values instead of a single array. We can combin the `del` function with the `map` function to avoid exploding the array:

```sh
jq 'map(del(.stock))' menu.json
```

This returns a single array containing the updated dictionaries:

```json
[
  {
    "name": "hotdogs",
    "price": 5.99
  },
  {
    "name": "pancakes",
    "price": 3.10
  },
  {
    "name": "waffles",
    "price": 7.50
  }
]
```

## Converting Lookup-Style Dictionaries to Arrays of Dictionaries

TO DO `to_entries` & `from_entries`

Good example is JSON returned by HIBP

```sh
jq '.Breaches | to_entries | [ .[] | select(.key | startswith("bob")) ] | from_entries' hibp.json
```

## An Optional Challenge

TO DO

## Final Thoughts

TO DO
