# PBS 133 of X — Firming up our Foundations

We're getting closer to having all our proverbial ducks in a row for starting work on the rewrite of the `Crypt::HSXKPasswd` Perl module in JavaScript. Before we could start we needed to introduce some new technologies and make some technology decisions. Here's a quick status update:

1. Introduce ES6 modules — done ✅
2. Introduce Node & NPM — done ✅
3. Choose a Linter and learn how to use it — ESLint (with thanks to guest teacher Helma van der Linden) ✅ 
4. Chose a documentation generator and learn how to use it — JSDoc with the DocDash theme ✅
5. Choose a Test Driven Development (TDD) platform and learn how to use it — work in progress (see below)
6. Choose a bundler and learn how to use it — to do

I spent my Christmas break working on the fifth point — figuring out the most appropriate TDD platform for the project. The contenders were QUnit, Mocha, Jasmin, and Jest.

I've picked Jest, but before we can learn to use it, there are some fundamental JavaScript concepts we need to refresh in our minds, and explore a little more deeply. Simultaneously, the community over on Slack have highlighted a few additional concepts that some are finding a little difficult to digest. Given those two facts, it seems sensible to dedicate this episode to a collection of refreshers, specifically:

1. Some confusion around the difference between `npm install` and `npm ci`.
2. Some confusion around JSDoc tags.
3. A refresher on some of the more esoteric aspects of functions — anonymous functions, arrow functions, and immediately-executing functions.
4. An unusual use of getter functions that's becoming popular in some modern JavaScript APIs, including Jest.

## Matching Podcast Episode

TO DO

## Episode Resources

TO UPDATE OR DELETE

* The instalment ZIP file — [pbs133.zip](https://github.com/bartificer/programming-by-stealth/raw/master/instalmentZips/pbs133.zip).

## A Refresher on Installing Modules with NPM

I've noticed some confusion as to what the `npm install` and `npm ci` commands actually do, and when you should use each, so let's try clarify that a little.

Firstly, let's set some context here — NPM does many things, and `package.json` can store many different types of information, but for this discussion we're only interested in installing modules into a Node project folder.

Let's start with the basics. A Node project folder is simply a folder that contains a valid `package.json` folder. When you use either the `node` or `npm` commands within a Node project folder they will interact with three key files/folders:

1. `package.json` specifies that 3rd-party modules the project depends on via the `dependencies` and `devDependencies`, and specifies acceptable version ranges for each.
2. `node_modules` is where 3rd-party modules get installed.
3. `package-lock.json` specifies the exact versions of each 3rd-party module that have been installed.

There are two distinct scenarios in which you can use a Node project folder, and it's the scenario that determines whether you need `npm ci` or `npm install`.

### Scenario 1 — Initialising a Previously Created Project for Use

In this scenario you are given a Node project folder that already contains both a `package.json` and a `package-lock.json` file, but no `node_modules` folder. Since 3rd-party modules are intended to be downloaded and installed by NPM, the `node_modules` folder should not be committed to source control, nor included in ZIP files for distribution.

**Any Node project folders included in the Instalment ZIPs in this series fall into this category, as do other people's Git repositories you clone.**

The problem to be solved here is that you want to initialise the `node_modules` folder **exactly as it was on the author's machine**. Given the fact that `package.json` defines **version ranges** for the dependencies, the same `package.json` files can produce many possible mixes of module versions, potentially leading to subtly different behaviour as different versions will have different bug fixes applied. We don't want *'a set of modules that meets the spec'*, we want the exact set the author had, i.e. we want to replicate the packages recorded in `package-lock.json`.

The `npm ci` command deletes anything that exists within the `node_modules`  folder, then reads `package-lock.json` and installs the exact versions listed into `node-modules`. I.e. it does a *clean install*, hence the command name `ci`.

In other words, **when initialising a copy of someone else's Node project, always use `npm ci`**.

### Scenario 2 — Managing Dependencies in a Node Project You Contribute To

There are four sub-scenarios here:

1. You've checked your own code out of source control on a new machine and want to pick up exactly where you left off
2. You're starting a new project
3. You want to add a new dependency to your project
4. You want to up date your existing dependencies to the latest versions that match the contents of `package.json`

The first sub-scenario is just scenario 1 really — initialising a copy of your own code to exactly where you left off is no different to initialising a copy of someone else's code exactly where they left off! So, **to pick up where you left off on your own code, also use `npm ci`.**

When you start a new project there are no dependencies, so really, the second sub-scenario is the same as the third. **To add a new dependency use `npm install --save`** (or `npm install --save-dev` for a dev dependency). This will add a new entry to `package.json` and specify the acceptable version range as *anything newer than the current version with the same major version*. (Remember, all NPM modules use [Semantic Versioning](https://semver.org)). The exact version installed will also be written to `package-lock.json`, as well as the exact version of every dependency that was installed along with the module you expressly installed.

Finally, **to roll all your dependencies forward to the latest versions allowed by the current `package.json` use `npm update`**. This will update both `package.json` to set new minimum versions, and `package-lock.json`. If you want to upgrade a dependency to a new major version you'll need to manually edit `package.json` and then run `npm update`.

## A Quick Summary of the Most Important JSDoc Tags

When you look at the list of tags JSDoc supports, it's easy to get overwhelmed. The thing is, all tags are not equally important. The clichéd 80/20 rule springs to mind — with many technologies 80% of the time you only need 20% of the features, but actually, for JSDoc I think it's more like 95% of the time you need just 5% of the tags!

Add to that the cliché that any documentation is better than none, and you can understand why my advice is to to build up the complexity of your JDoc comments incrementally. Beyond a few basic tags, I would suggest ignoring the others until you have a specific problem to solve, and then learning about the relevant tags at that point.

Firstly, complex doc comments are not necessarily better than simple ones — like so much in life, your doc comments should be as complex as they need to be, but no more. If you're documenting a simple variable or function, it should have a short simple doc comment!

Secondly, remember why you're documenting your code — **what is it future you will need to know?** 

For the big-picture items like modules and classes future you will want to know what concepts the modules and classes represent, and what functionality functionality they provide. What abstractions is the code built around? What assumptions are built into the design? What kinds of problems does this code solve? When might I want to use it? And just as importantly, what are its short-comings? When would I **not** want to use it? What problems does it not solve?

You often don't need any tags at all for these big-picture items — it's all about the descriptions, with perhaps some links to other items or outsides resources, i.e the `{@link}` and `@see` tags might be useful.

For smaller items like variables, functions, and arguments, the details are much more important, so you'll be relying less on the description and more on specific tags. The better you name your variables, functions, and arguments, the less need you'll have for descriptions!

**When documenting a variable or a class property the two most important things to capture are what it's for, and exactly what types of values will be stored.**

A good variable name may be enough to make it clear what a variable is for, but a short description often helps. The `@type` tag is vital for capturing what the variable will store.

```js
/**
 * The average duration of a gamma ray burst in seconds.
 * 
 * @type {number}
 */
 let avgGRBDuration = 42;
```

**When documenting functions the three most important things to capture are what the function does, what inputs it expects, and what the outputs will be.** 

Again, good names may be enough to capture what a function does, but  `@param` tags are vital for capturing the inputs. Again, within each `@param` tag a good name may omit the need for an English description, but you should always start the tag's contents with a type expression (in curly braces). 

When it comes to capturing the outputs the most important tag is`@returns`, and again, if the function is well named there may be no need for an English description within the tag, but you should always start the tag with a type expression (in curly braces).

What often gets overlooked is that fact that functions can output more than just return values, they can also throw errors! If you function can throw error, be sure to add `@throws` tags for each type of error. You should specify both the type of the error that could be thrown, and describe the circumstances under which it would happen.

```js
/**
 * Cube a given number.
 * 
 * @param {number} n - the number to cube
 * @returns {number}
 * @throws {TypeError} A type error is thrown when invalid arguments are passed.
 */
 function cube(n){
   if(isNaN(n)){
     throw new TypeError('must pass a number');
   }
   return n * n * n;
 }
```

### Is an Object an Instance, a Map, or a Record?

In JavaScript, objects are extremely generic, so they can be used to solve many problems. When it comes to documenting a variable, function argument, or return value that's an object, you need to dig a little deeper. In general, objects wear one of three possible hats:

1. They are **instances** of some class.
2. They are so-called **maps**, they keys are strings representing one thing, and the values are data of some other type.
3. They are **records**, expected to contain pre-determined key-value pairs.

To document an instance simply use the name of its class as the type, e.g.:

```js
/**
 * Calculate the start of a given day.
 * 
 * @param {Date} d - A time during the day who's start is to be calculated.
 * @Returns {Date} The given date & time with the hours, minutes, seconds, and milliseconds set to zero.
 * @throws {TypeError} A Type Error is thrown if invalid args are passed.
 * /
function startOfDay(d){
  if(!(d instanceOf Date)){
    throw new TypeError('must pass a JavaScript Date object');
  }
  const ans = new Date(d); // clone the date
  ans.setHours(0, 0, 0, 0); // un-intuitively, this sets hours, minutes, seconds & ms to zero!
  return ans;
}
```

To describe a map, use the `object.<keyType, valueType>` syntax.

Let's start with a simple example:

```js
/**
 * A mapping of number names to their values.
 * 
 * @type {object.<string, number>}
 */
 const numsByName = {
   zero: 0,
   one: 1,
   two: 2,
   three: 3,
   four: 4,
   five: 5,
   six: 6,
   seven: 7,
   eight: 8,
   nine: 9
 };
```

Finally, we have records. These are the most complex from a JSDoc POV.

For simple records we can use the `{key1: type1, key2: type2}` syntax:

```js
/**
 * The location of the best coffee in Maynooth.
 * 
 * @type {{latitude: number, longitude: number}}
 */
 const bestCoffee = {
   latitude: 53.380999,
   longitude: -6.593129
 };
```

This works fine for simple records, but does not scale to more keys. For records with more keys separate tags should be used for each key. Most annoyingly, the tags needed to do this are different for variables and function arguments.

**To document record variables, use the `@type` and `@property` tags**, e.g.:

```js
/**
 * The location of the best coffee in Maynooth.
 * 
 * @type {object}
 * @property {number} latitude The latitude in degrees.
 * @property {number} longitude The longitude in degrees.
 * @property {string} name
 */
 const bestCoffee = {
   latitude: 53.380999,
   longitude: -6.593129,
   name: 'Puppa Coffee'
 };
```

Notice that the `@type` tag specifies that the variable is an object, and then a separate `@property` tag is used to give the type, name, and an optional description for each key-value pair.

**To document record arguments, use the `@param` tag multiple times**, e.g.:

```js
/**
 * Print a location.
 * 
 * @param {object} loc - A record representing the location.
 * @param {number} loc.latitude - The latitude in degrees.
 * @property {number} loc.longitude - The longitude in degrees.
 * @property {string} loc.name
 */
 function printLoc(loc){
   console.log(`${loc.name}: ${loc.latitude}, ${loc.longitude}`);
 }
```

Notice that the first `@param` tag says that the argument named `loc` is an object, then we add additional `@param` tags for each key, using JavaScript dot notation to specify the names of the keys within `loc`.

## A Refresher on Functions

TO DO

## A Novel use of Getters

TO DO — MAYBE

## Final Thoughts

Hopefully the first two sections will help people better understand how we're using NPM, and how to document code effectively. The final two sections will help us better understand the Jest TDD API which we'll be introducing in the next instalment.