# PBS 134 of X — Firming up our Foundations (2 of 2)

In [the previous instalment](./pbs133) we made a start on firming up some of our foundations in preparation for diving into the Jest testing framework. Between the two instalments we had six topics to cover, four of which were covered in the previous instalment:

1. Clearing up some confusion around the difference between `npm install` and `npm ci`. ✅
2. Some guidance on which JSDoc tags to use when, especially when documenting plain objects. ✅
3. A refresher on the different ways of defining functions, specifically function statements, function expressions, and arrow functions. ✅
4. A reminder on how function chaining works (heavily used by Jest) ✅
6. An explanation of how getters can be used to construct short but powerful syntaxes that seem quite counterintuitive at first glance (heavily used by Jest)
7. An introduction to the concept of functions that return functions (used by Jest)

That leaves us with two advanced uses of functions to explore in this instalment.

## Matching Podcast Episode

TO DO

## Episode Resources

TO UPDATE IF NEEDED

* The instalment ZIP file — [pbs134.zip](https://github.com/bartificer/programming-by-stealth/raw/master/instalmentZips/pbs134.zip).

## An Interesting (ab)use of Getters

What I'm going to describe in this section is an interesting combination of two ideas. Both idea are in quite common use, and I'm seeing more and more examples of them being used together, but I can't seem to find a name for either concept. I tried writing this section without naming the concepts, but I failed miserably — it all just degraded to word soup!

So, I can't find existing names, and I can't talk about the concepts without names, so I'm going to do the must hubristic thing I've ever done, and name them myself!

I'm going to dub the first concept *'Ouroboros function chains'*, the second *'steath instance functions'*, the combination of the two as '*stealthy Ouroboros function chains*'.

### 'Ouroboros' Function Chains

We ended the previous instalment with a refresher on the concept of *function chaining* by looking at this example:

```js
(new Date()).toString().toLowerCase().replace(/[ ]/g, '-')
```

In this example the object being passed down the chain changed with each function call — the chain started with a new `Date` object, the first call returned a new string, the second call another new string, and the third call a third new string. Each function in the chain is an instance function, but the object doing the calling, and the class providing the function changes as you move through the chain. At each hop in the chain you have one object on which an instance function is called that returns a different object. Even when the calling object and the returned object are both strings, they are different string.

I picked this example because it's such a normal thing to do in your code. Create an object, convert it to a string, then manipulate that string. However, there exists a sub-set of instance functions that doesn't behave like this — rather than returning new objects, these instance functions return `this`, i.e., a reference to the object they were called on.

**When a function in a function chain returns `this`, the object after that link in the chain is the same object as before!**

I think of this as being like a snake eating its own tail to form a kind of infinite circle, and ancient mythology gives us a name for that — the [Ouroborus](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ouroboros)

We've seen this kind of chain before — many of jQuery's instance functions are what I've chosen to name *Ouroboros functions*. Consider the following example:

```js
const mainHeader = $('<h1>').addClass('mainHeading').attr('id', 'main_heading');
```

The initial call to the `$()` function creates a new jQuery object representing a newly created `<h1>`  tag. This also means that it's the `.addClass()` function from the jQuery class that gets called on the object next, and that function adds a class, and then returns itself. This means that the `.attr()` function is called on the same object the `.addClass()` function was called on — the code creates and object and then mutates it in two ways before it gets saved to a variable named `mainHeader`.

Under the hood this kind of self-referential chaining is enabled by returning the special value `this`.

Let's create a very simplistic class of our own that provides two simple *Ouroboros* functions:

```js
class Parrot{
  constructor(name='Parry'){
    this._name = name;
  }
  get name() { return this._name; }
  squawk(){
    console.log('caaaaw');
    return this;
  }
  talk(){
    console.log(`${this.name} wants a cracker`);
    return this;
  }
}
```

This class represents parrots — each parrot has one property, a name, and it can do two things, squawk, and talk. The constructor optionally accepts a name, there's a simple getter for the name, and then two instance functions that each return `this` (`.squawk()` & `.talk()`).

This class allows for *Ouroboros function chains*:

```js
const p = new Parrot('Polly');
p.squawk().talk().squawk();
// logs:
// ----
// caaaaw
// Polly wants a cracker
// caaaaw
```

Note that if your JavaScript console also writes returned values to the console then the final *caaaaw* will be followed by the value returned by the final call to the `.squawk()` function, i.e. and instance of the `Parrot` class with the name Polly.

Notice that the object to come out of the end of the chain is the same object that started it, `p`, the parrot named Polly.

### 'Stealth Functions'

We know that getters were added to JavaScript to provide a mechanism for supporting derived attribute values. In the real world, many of a physical object's properties can be different aspects of a single true property. Think of a circle — it has a radius, a diameter, a circumference and an area, but while they all have different values, they're utterly dependent on each other, change one, and they all change. It would not make sense to separately store each in a JavaScript object, because you could easily end up with impossible circles. Instead, you should store just one value, usually the radius, and derive all the related attributes from it, in other words, something like this:

```js
class Circle{
  constructor(r){
    this._radius = r;
  }
  get radius() { return this._radius; }
  get diameter() { return this.radius * 2; }
  get circumference() { return 2 * Math.PI * this.radius; }
  get area() {return Math.PI * this.radius * this.radius; }
}
```

**Regardless of what getters were designed to be used for, they are just than functions that take no arguments and return a value!** 

Getters can return *any* value, even `this`, so they can be used to create function chains that don't look like function chains!

Let's update our `Parrot` class to use getters for squawking and talking:

```js
class Parrot{
  constructor(name='Parry'){
    this._name = name;
  }
  get name() { return this._name; }
  get squawk(){
    console.log('caaaaw');
    return this;
  }
  get talk(){
    console.log(`${this.name} wants a cracker`);
    return this;
  }
}
```

Notice that the only change is the addition of the keyword `get` twice!

Now that our functions have donned a disguise, we call them as if we were accessing a property, but, they still return `this`, so they still chain, just without looking like functions:

```js
const q = new Parrot('yllop'); // Polly sorta-kinda mirrored
q.squawk.talk.squawk
// logs:
// -----
// caaaaw
// yllop wants a cracker
// caaaaw
```

Because both `.squawk` and `.talk` are getters that return `this`, the code above is equivalent to:

```js
const q = new Parrot('yllop');
q.squawk;
q.talk;
q.squawk;
```

This is a fun nerd trick, but is it useful?

### Using 'Disguised Ouroboros Functions' for more Human-friendly APIs — A Worked Example

The reason this odd trick is starting to gain popularity is because it can be used to enable more human-friendly code. We've already seen this in action in the [is.js](https://is.js.org) type checking library where you can do things like:

```js
is.not.string(x);
```

The `.not` is a function in disguise!

To see how it's done, let's create a class for joining arrays of strings into human-friendly lists, i.e., turn the array `['pancakes', 'waffles', 'popcorn']` into the string `pancakes, waffles & popcorn`. To add a little more spice, let's support specifying the final conjunction (the `&` in this example), and wrapping each array element with some kind of punctuation.

Before we look at how it's done, let's see the kind of syntax we want to enable:

```js
const favFoods = ['pancakes', 'waffles', 'popcorn'];
console.log('Allison: what would you like to eat?')
console.log(`Bart: I like ${joiner().and.join(favFoods)}`);
console.log(`Allison: pick one; ${joiner().or.join(favFoods)}`);
// logs:
// ----
// Allison: what would you like to eat?
// Bart: I like pancakes, waffles and popcorn
// Allison: pick one; pancakes, waffles or popcorn

console.log(joiner().ampersand.doubleQuote.join(favFoods));
// logs:
// ----
// "pancakes", "waffles" & "popcorn"
```

LEFT OFF HERE!!!

## Functions that Return Functions

At this point it seems a good idea to remind ourselves that in JavaScript, everything is either a literal value, or reference to an object.

Booleans, numbers, and strings are literal values, though remember that modern versions of JavaScript automatically convert strings to instances of the `String` class when needed, hence code like the following being possible:

```js
console.log("waffles".toUpperCase())
```

Everything else is an object — plain objects are objects are instances of the class `Object`, arrays are instances of `Array`, regular expressions are instances of `RegExp`, exceptions are instances of the class `Error` or one of its sub-classes, and importantly for us today, functions (and classes) are instances of the class `Function`.

So, a function is an object, and functions take literal values or references to objects as inputs, and can optionally return a single value or reference to an object. We've already seen functions being passed to other functions as arguments, we refer to those as *callbacks*, what we've not looked at yet are functions that return functions.

### There's no Special Syntax

We've seen how to create anonymous functions, and we've seen how to return values from functions, so there's no new syntax needed, we've just never combined these pieces of knowledge in this way before.

As an example, let's create a function that creates functions that *make* (print) some food:

```js
/**
 * A function to generate functions that 'make' a specific food item.
 * 
 * @param {string} [foodItem='🥞'] - An emoji representing the food to be made by the generated function. Defaults to pancakes.
 * @returns {function} Returns a function that takes one argument, a number, and 'makes' that many items of food by logging the appropriate number of emoji to the console.
 */
function foodMakerMaker(foodItem='🥞'){
  if(typeof foodItem !== 'string') foodItem = '🥞';
  return (n=1) => {
    if(!(String(n).match(/^\d+$/)) && n > 0) n = 1;
    console.log(foodItem.repeat(n));
  };
}
```

## An Unusual use of Getters

## Final Thoughts

TO DO