## PBS 165 of X — jq: In-Place Array & Dictionary Manipulation

TO DO

## Matching Podcast Episode

TO DO

## Installment Resources

* The instalment ZIP file — [pbs165.zip](https://github.com/bartificer/programming-by-stealth/raw/master/instalmentZips/pbs165.zip) TO CREATE

## PBS 164 Challenge Solution

TO DO

## Manipulating Without Exploding

At this stage in our jq journey we've met many operators and functions which can manipulate data, but each time we've applied a transformation to each element in an array we've done so by exploding it apart updating each piece, and then re-assembling it. We've never even considered applying the same transformation to every value in a dictionary, because based purely on what we've learned so far, we couldn't put the dictionary back together again!

What if you could edit the contents of arrays and dictionaries without ever needing to explode them? As you've probably guessed from the setup, you can! And, this entire instalment is dedicated to doing just that with two of jq's most powerful functions, `map` & `map_values`.

MAYBE — cover `reduce` too

## Altering Each Element in an Array with the `map` Function

In most programming languages, you need to loop over arrays to manipulate their contents, but in jq you don't need to do that — you can simply pipe an array to the `map` function and describe the desired transformation with a filter passed as the first argument.

Within a the filter passed as the first argument to `map`,  `.` represents *'the array element being processed'*, and the filter will be applied to each element in the array. The function then outputs the updated array.

In effect, `map` lets you **loop over an aray in a single function call**, and **process each element without exploding the array**.

For example, we can convert all the numbers in an array to their absolute values with:

```sh
# -n tells jq not to expect any input
# -c tells jq to render the output in a compact format
jq -nc '[1, -2, 3, -42] | map(. | abs)'
# outputs [1,2,3,42]
```

One of the most common uses of `map` is in conjunction with `select`, allowing you filter an array down to only the elements that meet a particular criteria without needing to explode and then re-assemble it.

As an example, let's filter the Nobel Prizes data set down to an array with just the physics prizes, with their order reversed so the older prize comes first, and the newest last. Here's how we would do that without using `map`:

```sh
jq '[.prizes[] | select(.category == "physics")] | reverse' NobelPrizes.json
```

Note the need to explode the prizes with `.prizes[]`, and then to re-assemble the array by wrapping the exposion and the `select` filters in square brackets ( `[` & `]`).

With `map`, we can simplify things:

```sh
jq '.prizes | map(select(.category == "physics")) | reverse' NobelPrizes.json
```

We now have a simple filter chain without the need for nesting part of it within square brackets, making it easier to read and to maintain.

Note that this technique works because the `select` function returns `empty` rather than `null` when called with a value that does not match the specified criteria, transforming un-matched entries into absolute nothingless, hence deleting them!

One final point to note — `map` will not give an error when the input is a dictionary, it will simply treat the values within the key-value pairs as array elements, and output an array of their processed results. At first glance this might seem useless, how often do you have a dictionary who's keys you don't need? But actually, it is occassionaly useful, imagine you have weekly sales data in dictionary indexed by day-of-the-week, like so (`weeklySales.json` in the instalment ZIP):

```json
{
  "mon": 2343,
  "tue": 4324,
  "wed": 4121,
  "thur": 8762,
  "fri": 11452,
  "sat": 32394,
  "sun": 0
}
```

To convert this to an array of numbers we can call `map` with a filter that passes the values through un-changed, i.e. simply `.`:

```sh
jq -c 'map(.)' weeklySales.json # outputs [2343,4324,4121,8762,11452,32394,0]
```

Notice that the values in the array are in the order the keys were added to the dictionary, not in any kind of sorted order.

## The `map_values` Function

In many ways the `map_values` function is very similar to the `map` function, but while `map` is primarily designed for processing arrays, `map_values` is primarily designed for processing dictionaries.

It's structure is the same — the input should be a dictionary, and its argument is a filter to be applied to each value in the dictionary to produce a new value in the output dictionary, and within the filter, `.` is the value currently being processed.

So, to double all the sales data in our weekly sales dictionary, we would run the command:

```sh
jq 'map_values(. * 2)' weeklySales.json
```

This produces the following dictionary:

```json
{
  "mon": 4686,
  "tue": 8648,
  "wed": 8242,
  "thur": 17524,
  "fri": 22904,
  "sat": 64788,
  "sun": 0
}
```

Similar to how `map` does not throw an error when passed a dictionary, `map_values` will not throw an error when you pass it an array, it will simply process the array, and return an updated array (not a dictionary).

## Beware the Subtle Difference between `map` & `map_values` 

With `map`, when a filter maps a single input values to multiple output values, they all appear in the output array, but `map_values` will only include the first generated value for each input.

As a somewhat contrived example to illustrate this difference, let's pass an array of arrays to both functions and see what happens when we use a filter that explodes these sub-arrays:

```sh
# use map to explode sub-arrays
jq -nc '[[1], [2, 2], [3, 3, 3]] | map(.[])' # outputs [1,2,2,3,3,3]

# try use map_values to explode sub-arrays
jq -nc '[[1], [2, 2], [3, 3, 3]] | map_values(.[])' # outputs [1,2,3]
```

## The `reduce` Function 

TO DO - MAYBE

## An Optional Challenge

TO DO

## Final Thoughts

TO DO

# EPISODE BREAK — jq: Some Advanced Topics

## Traditional Loops with `foreach`, `while`, `until` & MAYBE `repeat`

## MAYBE — Recursive descent with `recurse`

Most sensible example is a directory tree, can generate with: https://www.npmjs.com/package/dir-to-json

## Variables & Loops with `as`

Potential example — prizes with and above average number of winners

## If-the-else

## Try-catch

