# PBS 116 of X — Introducing GitHub

In [the previous instalment](./pbs117) we described how multiple people who all have full access to a repository can collaborate on a project. Each contributor cloned the repository to each of their development machines, then fetched, pushed, and pulled to keep all the changes in sync across the team. We also described a number of different approaches to hosting a shared repository that can act as a hub for this kind of collaboration. We described how you could run your own Git server, but these days, it's much more common to use a Software-as-a-Service (SaaS) approach and simply use someone else's Git server. There are all sorts of offerings on the market, ranging in price from free to eye-wateringly expensive. I linked to and described a few of the commonly used Git SaaS offerings in the previous instalment, but I ended by saying this series would pick just one to dive into a little more deeply — [GitHub](https://github.com/).

Why GitHub? Three reasons — it has a full-featured free tier, a long history of supporting open source developers, and, a business model that doesn't rely on tracking users and selling their data (i.e. it's not [FreePI](https://bartb.ie/freepi)). Because of this nice feature set and long history of being a good netizen, the open source community has embraced GitHub, and it's  become the go-to place to host open source software. Many high-profile open source projects are hosted on GitHub, including [jQuery](https://github.com/jquery/jquery), [Bootstrap](https://github.com/twbs/bootstrap), and the [PHP language](https://github.com/php/php-src) this series will soon be shifting its focus to soon.

In future instalments we'll learn how to use GitHub to interact with the open source community, but we need to get acquainted with GitHub before we can do that!

## Matching Podcast Episode

TO DO

## GitHub Overview

Before we can use GitHub to interact with the open source community, we need to get comfortable with GitHub itself.

At its most fundamental level GitHub is a service that allows you to host Git repositories in the cloud, and access them via any Git client. You create and manage your repositories on the GitHub website, and then you can clone them to your development computers using what ever Git tools you're using now, be it the Git CLI, a GUI app, or the Git features in your IDE.

As well as allowing you to create and manage repos, the GitHub interface also allows you to browse the contents of your repos. You can navigate through the various folders, view the various files, and switch between different branches, tags, and commits.

You can't just view your code on the GitHub website, you can edit it too! They have a web-based editor that does a decent job of syntax highlighting your code, and while I wouldn't recommend using the GitHub website as your primary code editor, it's great for making quick edits and fixes.

GitHub takes a more wholistic approach to hosting code — the problem they set out to solve is not *"how do we make Git hosting easier"*, but *"how do we make collaborating on code easier"*. Git is the foundation their solution is built on, but they've continued to add more and more tools over the years. GitHub repositories can contain Wikis, issue trackers, and even simple websites using GitHub Pages. In fact, this series is hosted on GitHub Pages!

Another useful feature are GitHub releases. When you tag a commit with a semver-style version number pre-fixed with the letter `v` GitHub will automatically create pre-packaged snapshots of your repository and make them available for easy download.

GitHub have also moved into more advanced features like GitHub Actions which allow you to execute code in response to Git activities. This is part of a larger movement in software engineering towards an approach known as [CI/CD](https://www.redhat.com/en/topics/devops/what-is-ci-cd) or *Continuous Integration/Continuous Delivery* (the last D is also sometimes defined as *Deployment*). We're not going to be going that far in this series, but you might want to go explore on your own time 🙂

## GitHub Resources

As a cloud-hosted service, GitHub is constantly changing and improving, so both the capabilities and the interface as perpetually in flux. It simply wouldn't make sense for me to waste my time in this series writing a GitHub tutorial when there are much better resources published and maintained by GitHub themselves!

The hub for all GitHub's copious documentation is [docs.github.com](https://docs.github.com/en).

You'll also find more GitHub tutorials than you can shake a proverbial stick at all over the web.

## Cloning a GitHub Repo — Authentication

Once you've set up your account on the GitHub websites and created your first repository, the next thing you'll want to do is clone it to your development computer.

Let's assume, for now, that we're using just the Git CLI, and see how we can do it from first principles.

GitHub publishes your repositories over two protocols, HTTPS, and SSH.

While it takes a little bit more work to set up, in my experience, you'll get the smoothest experience with SSH. GitHub's SSH support relies entirely on SSH keys, there are no passwords involved.

Big-picture the process works like this:

1. You generate an SSH Identity on your development computer (or you use an SSH identity you've already set up for SSHing to other computers). An SSH identity consists of two parts, a private key which is usually stored in a file named `id_rsa`, and a matching public key which usually stored in a file named `id_rsa.pub`. As its name suggests, you keep the private key on your computer(s), and **you never share it with anyone**!
2. You add your public key to your GitHub account (**Settings** → **SSH & GPG Keys**)
3. You open the repository on the GitHub site and get its SSH URL (by clicking the big green **Code** button and making sure the SSH tab is selected in the resulting popover)
4. You clone the repository using the `git clone` command, using the SSH URL from the previous step.

Once you have the repository cloned you can interact with it using all the standard Git commands like `git fetch`, `git pull`, and `git push`.

You might find [the chapter on SSH keys](https://ttt.bartificer.net/book.html#ttt30) in this series' older sibling series [Taming the Terminal](https://ttt.bartificer.net/) useful.

If you find the concept of SSH keys too daunting, or if you just don't like using SSH, you can use HTTPS Git URLS with GitHub, but be prepared for some faffing about, especially if you're using the standard Git CLI, or a GUI that does not support OAuth2 HTTPS authentication.

If you're using a sufficiently modern Git client you'll be able to log in to GitHub within the client quite easily using OAuth2. The client will open a web page for you, you'll log in to GitHub, grant the app permission to use your account, and then get redirected back to the app.

Many Git apps don't support OAuth2, including the current versions of the Git CLI. For those app you need to generate what GitHub calls as *Personal Access Token*, or PAT. You use a PAT as if it were a password, but it's a long randomly generated key, and it allows logins without 2FA so they work in apps that only provide a simple username and password field.

I get the impression GitHub would much prefer you not use PATs, because they're really hidden them quite well! You'll find them under **Settings** → **Developer Settings** → **Personal Access Tokens**. 

Note that if you use an HTTPS GitHub URL with the Git CLI you'll need to enter your PAT each time you fetch, pull, or push. This is why I strongly recommend using SSH URLs and SSH keys 🙂

## Interacting with GitHub (4 Interfaces)

GitHub is becoming ever more flexible in how you interact with it. There are now four distinct ways of interacting with it — the web interface, the standard Git protocols, a special GitHub CLI, and a REST API.

### The GitHub Web Interface

Unless you need to automate the creation and/or management of GitHub repositories, the web interface is probably the simplest way to create and manage your repos.

A nice feature the web interface gives you is that if your repo contains a Markdown file named `README.md` in its root directory, a rendered version of that file is used as the body of the repos front page. This is a great place to add some basic documentation for your own future reference, or, a quick-start guide for any projects you share with others or the world.

The web can also be a good place to explore a repo, navigate around the files and folders, see what tags and branches exist, and on public repos, explore the non-code aspects of the project like the issues list and the wiki.

As mentioned before, you can edit code in the web interface, but it's not nearly as good an experience as using a native code editor or IDE.

### The Standard Git Protocols

Again, as previously mentioned, you can interact with GitHub repos using all the standard Git tools, be that the Git CLI, your favourite stand-alone Git GUI, or a code editor or IDE with Git support.

The advantage to doing this is that you can just continue to do everything you did when you were hosting your repositories locally. The down-side is that unless your client has added dedicated GitHub support, you'll only be able to access standard Git features, you won't use the added extras GitHub provides.

### The Git CLI

GitHub have developed their own command line tool for interacting with GitHub-specific features. Their CLI does not replace the standard Git CLI, but is designed to be used in parallel with it.

You use the `git` command to do the regular Git stuff, and the `gh` command to do the GitHub-specific stuff.

Like the Git CLI, the GitHub CLI is cross-platform, and you can get installation instructions and documentation at [cli.github.com](https://cli.github.com/).

### The GitHub REST API & GitHub-aware Apps

GitHub's API can be used by any developer to interact with GitHub. This is how it's possible for Git GUI apps to provide GitHub-specific functionality. Many popular Git GUI apps are starting to make use of this API, including my favourite, [Git Kraken](https://www.gitkraken.com/invite/qJbaN2yv).

GitHub also use this API to power their own cross-platform GUI apps. I find their apps a little too basic for my needs these days, but when I was new to Git I used the macOS GitHub app as my only Git interface. You can download the various apps from [desktop.github.com](https://desktop.github.com/).

## MAYBE — Hello World Walk-through

## Final Thoughts

MENTION PAGES APP

TEASE OPEN SOURCE AGAIN
