# PBS 146 of X — Shell Loops & Arrays

TO DO

## Matching Podcast Episode

TO OD

## Episode Resources
TO UPDATE

* The instalment ZIP file — [pbs145.zip](https://github.com/bartificer/programming-by-stealth/raw/master/instalmentZips/pbs145.zip)

## Loop-like Commands in Bash

Bash supports four loop-like commands — `while`, `until`, `for`, and one that's a little different to the rest, `select`. All four need to be used in conjunction with the `do` and `done` commands, and all four support the flow-of-control commands `continue` & `break`.

While you can make do with just `while` loops, the reason the other three exist is to make your code shorter and more readable, so I strongly advise using them when they're the most appropriate choice!

I use the following guidance when choosing which loop command to use

1. **While loops** are designed to repeat commands while some condition remains true. E.g. *keep trying this command until it succeeds*.
2. **Until loops** are the inverse of while loops, they are designed to repeat commands while some condition remains false. E.g. *keep asking for input until you get a valid day of the week*.
3. **For loops** are designed to repeat the same command once with each of a list of values. E.g. *print the reverse of each line in this file*.
4. **Select Loops** are designed to implement menu systems — ask the user what they's like to do, do it, then ask them what they'd like to do next, then do it …

Regardless of which of the commands you use, the basic structure of the loops is the same:

```bash
LOOP_COMMAND LOOP_ARGS
do
    # the commands to be looped
done
```

Where `LOOP_COMMAND` is one of `while`, `until`, `for` & `select`, and `LOOP_ARGS` is the appropriate extra info the chosen loop command needs.

At any point between the `do` and `done` commands the `continue` command will jump to the next iteration of the loop, and the `break` command will end the loop entirely.

### Simple While Loops

Like the `if` command, the `while` command expects to be passed a command to execute as the first argument, and any arguments to be passed to that command as subsequent arguments. The exit code will determine whether or not the commands between the `do` and `done` commands get executed. If the exit code is *success*, the content of the loop get execute, and the condition is tested again. If the exit code is *success* again the loop gets execute again. The loop ends the first time the exit code is not *success*.

#### Reading a File's Contents Line-by-Line

We've already seen that the `read` command can be used to read from the standard input stream, and that that's usually the keyboard, but it's not always the keyboard. You may well have heard that when you use the *pipe* (`|`) symbol to connect two terminal commands you are redirecting the output of the command on the left to the input of the command on the right. The way that works is that anything written to standard out by the command on the left is added to the standard input before the command on the right is called, so, in effect, it is like the command on the left typed into the command on the right.

We used the `read` command to read a single line of text from the keyboard, if standard in contains text already, `read` will take the first line of that text, store it in a variable with the given name (first argument to `read`), and then exit with an exit code of *success*. When the input stream is empty it will exit with an exit code of *failure*.

Finally, by default the `read` command treats back-slashes in the input stream as escape characters. You almost never want this, so you almost always repress the interpretation of escape characters with the `-r` flag.

Putting all this together we can create a script that reads your computer's hosts file (`/etc/hosts`) one line at a time, ignores empty lines and lines starting with a pound/octothorp symbol (`#`), and prints out all other lines.

We'll use the `continue` command to skip over the lines that should be skipped over. You'll find the code in the instalment ZIP as `pbs146a-while.sh`:

```bash
#!/usr/bin/env bash

echo "Your computer has the following hosts entries:"

# read the hosts file and pipe it to standard in,
# then loop through it line-by-line
cat /etc/hosts | while read -r hostsEntry
do
    # skip empty lines
    if [[ -z $hostsEntry ]]
    then
        continue
    fi

    # skip lines that start with an octothorp
    if echo "$hostsEntry" | egrep -q '^#'
    then
        continue
    fi

    # if we got here, print the line
    echo "* $hostsEntry"
done
```

Notice that like when we passed a variable name to the `read` command when reading from the keyboard, we do not pre-fix the name (`hostsEntry`) with a `$` symbol because `$` means *'the value of'*.

Also notice the use of the `-z` test to check if the line is an empty string.

Another important point to notice is the use of the `continue` command to jump to the next iteration of the loop without printing anything when a line should be skipped.

Finally, I want to explain the check for lines starting with an octothorp:

```bash
echo "$hostsEntry" | egrep -q '^#'
```

This line takes the value of the variable named `hostsEntryt` and sends it to standard in before calling the `egrep` command to apply a regular expression to the contents of standard in. The regular expression simply means *starts with an octothorp*, and the `-q` flag tells `egrep` to be quiet, i.e. not to write anything to standard out. We're using this sequence as the condition for an `if` statement, so we only care about the exit code generated by `egrep`, which will be *success* if standard in matches the regular expression.

### Until Loops

The `until` command works just like the `while` command except that the commands between `do` and `done` get executed as long as the exit code is **not** *success*.

The most common use of until loops is to wait for something to happen, or to keep asking a user for input until they give something cromulent.

As an example, let's wrote a script that needs the user to enter a valid name, which we'll define as a one or more letters. The users can pass the name as the first argument, or, they'll be prompted for it.

You'll find the code in `pbs146b-until.sh`:

```bash
#!/usr/bin/env bash

# use the first arg as the first guess at the name
name=$1

# keep asking for a valid name until we get one
until echo "$name" | egrep -q '^[[:alpha:]]+$'
do
    read -p "What's your name? " name
done

# print a greeting
echo "Well hello there $name 🙂"
```

### For Loops

The `for` command requires at least three arguments — a name to use when creating a variable that will exist within the loop, the keyword `in` and one or more values to loop over as a list of arguments. 

The commands between `do` and `done` get executed once for each additional argument after `in`, and their value will be available as a variable with the name passed as the first argument to `for`.

As a general rule, for loops will split their input on spaces, but when you use shell globs (`*` expansions etc.) file names with spaces not get split into multiple values. By using the `$()` operator you can loop over the output of a command, one word at a time.

TO DO — EXAMPLES

### Select Menu Loops

The `select` command uses the same syntax as the `for` command, but instead of running the commands between `do` and `done` once for each additional argument after `in`, the user is presented with a menu showing all the values, and asked to enter a number representing their choice, that value will go into the loop variable, and the code will execute. This will continue for ever unless the `exit` or `break` commands get executed within the loop.

TO DO – EXAMPLE

## Final Thoughts

TO DO
