# PBS 132 of X — Managing JSDoc

We started our short journey into the world of documentation in instalment 130 by exploring the more philosophical side of documentation — why it's a good idea in general, why we need it for our project, who our audiences are, and what documentation we need. I also explained why I think JSDoc is a good fit for us, and set the big-picture scene. We will use JSDoc comments to embed our API documentation into our source code, we'll add some additional static content, and there will be two versions of our documentation, one for developers using the API, and one for contributors helping to write the API itself.

With that foundation laid, we spend the previous instalment learning about those JSDoc comments we'll be embedding in our source code. Now, in this instalment, we'll look at the practicalities of managing our documentation within the project, how we can add a lot of very useful automation, and we'll look at how we can customise the look of the generated documentation with a JSDoc theme.

## Matching Podcast Episode

TO DO

## Configuring JSDoc (with a Config File)

In the previous instalment we got a glimpse of how to use a JSDoc configuration file, but it deserves a deeper look.

JSDoc's configuration is ultimately a simple JavaScript object (dictionary), but there are two ways to define it — directly as as JSON file, or indirectly as a CommonJS (not ES6) JavaScript module that exports it. Writing code to generate the config is overkill for most people most of the time, and since we've not learned about CommonJS modules (opting for the standard ES6 format instead), we'll be using a JSON file.

JSDoc's config file support is asymmetric — anything you can do on the command line you can do via a config file, but there are things you can do via a config file that you can't do on the command line.

This asymmetry is the reason we used a config file last week even though I'd have preferred not to. The config setting `source.includePattern` doesn't have a command line equivalent, so we needed to use a config file to get JSDoc to process `.mjs` files at all, hence, for our purposes, the most basic possible config file is:

```json
{
	"source": {
        "includePattern": ".+\\.(mjs|jsdoc)$"
    }
}
```

### Specifying the Source

Up to this point we've been specifying the source files as arguments on the command line, but we can avoid that by specifying one or more folders to load from using `source.include` which should be an array of file paths. Let's add the `src` folder:

```json
{
	"source": {
		"include": ["./src/"],
        "includePattern": ".+\\.(mjs|jsdoc)$"
    }
}
```

By default JSDoc will recurse 10 levels deep into the included folders, but you can control it with the `recurseDepth` option, or disable it altogether by setting `opts.recurse` to `false`.

### Replacing Command Line Flags (Readme & Encoding)

Speaking of the `opts` dictionary, that's an import one — every command line flag can be controlled using it's long name as a sub-key of `opts`, e.g. the `-R` flag's long name is `--readme`, so we can include our `README.md` by setting `opts.readme`:

```json
{
    "opts": {
        "readme": "README.md"
    },
    "source": {
        "include": ["./src/"],
        "includePattern": ".+\\.(mjs|jsdoc)$"
    }
}
```

What happens if the config file specifies one value for a flag, and the command line another? The command line wins, or, in the formal jargon — **command line arguments take precedence over config file keys**.

You might imagine we should set the destination folder in the config file too. The flag is `--destination`, so it could indeed be set with `opts.destination`, but there are two reason we don't want to do this:

1. There is no one output dir for us, we will be generating two sets of documentation for our two audiences after all.
2. As part of our automation of the process we'll need to empty this folder, so to avoid having to change the value in two places, we should specify it in the automation only.

However there is one more option we should set while we're editing this section of the config. It's good practice to be specific about character encodings, so let's use the `--encoding` flag to specify UTF8:

```json
{
    "opts": {
        "encoding": "utf8",
        "readme": "./README.md"
    },
    "source": {
        "include": ["./src/"],
        "includePattern": ".+\\.(mjs|jsdoc)$"
    }
}
```

You'll find the [full list of command line flags in the documentation](https://jsdoc.app/about-commandline.html).

### Enabling Plugins

There are no command line flags for controlling plugins, so the only way to enable them is by adding them to the `plugins` array. The only plugin we need is the built-in Markdown one, so let's add that:

```jsdoc
{
    "opts": {
        "encoding": "utf8",
        "readme": "./README.md"
    },
    "source": {
        "include": ["./src/"],
        "includePattern": ".+\\.(mjs|jsdoc)$"
    }, 
    "plugins": [
        "plugins/markdown"
    ]
}
```

We'll be using the Markdown plugin in its default configuration, but there are a few tweaks you can make, and they're described on the [Markdown page of the documentation](https://jsdoc.app/plugins-markdown.html).

### Controlling Tags

By default JSDoc actually supports two sets of doc comment tags (which it refers to as *tag dictionaries*): its own, and those for [Google's closure compiler](https://developers.google.com/closure/compiler). There's a very significant overlap between the two, and by default, whenever there's a conflict of meaning, JSDoc preferences its own meaning over Google's. However, you can choose to allow only one or the other, or to reverse the order with the `tags.dictionaries` config setting. This should be an array of strings, each being the name of a tag dictionary, and they should be listed in order of precedence, with the highest precedence first. By default, `tags.dictionaries` has the value `["jsdoc", "closure"]`. Because JSDoc supports plugins, it would also be possible for a third party to provide other tag dictionaries, but I've never seen any.

As well as specifying the tag dictionaries to use, the `tags` config setting also allows you to tell JSDoc how it should respond when it meets a tag it doesn't recognise. By default it simply ignores it, but, if you set `tags.allowUnknownTags` to `false`, then JSDoc will print a warning when it meets an unknown tag. I always set JSDoc this way, because the unknown tags are almost always typos in my experience 🙂

We'll be keeping the default tag dictionary order, but, we'll be disallowing unknown tags:

```json
{
    "opts": {
        "encoding": "utf8",
        "readme": "./README.md"
    },
    "source": {
        "include": ["./src/"],
        "includePattern": ".+\\.(mjs|jsdoc)$"
    }, 
    "plugins": [
        "plugins/markdown"
    ],
    "tags": {
        "allowUnknownTags": false,
        "dictionaries": ["jsdoc","closure"]
    }
}
```

### MAYBE — `templates.*`

TO MAYBE DO

## Automating The Document Generation (NPM Scripts)

A JSDoc config file can simplify our `jsdoc` command significantly, but there's still too much to remember, so we need to automate the process. We can use NPM's scripts feature to do this for us.

NodeJS project files (`package.json`) support a key named `scripts` that's a dictionary of terminal commands indexed by human-friendly names. You then run the named terminal commands with `npm run`.

The `npm init` command pre-populates `scripts` with a default placeholder command named `test`. We'll add our commands above that.

Let's start with a simple script to generate our docs:

```json
"scripts": {
    "docs": "npx jsdoc -c ./jsdoc.conf.json --destination ./docs",
    "test": "echo \"Error: no test specified\" && exit 1"
  },
```

Once we save `package.json`, we could generate our docs with the command `npm run docs`.

However, this initial implementation is too naive. While JSDoc will create a folder if one does not already exist, it won't empty one that does, so we need to take care of that. If we're prepared to tolerate some error messages we could naively pre-fix our command with the `rm` command to delete the contents of our output folder:

```json
"scripts": {
    "docs": "rm -rf ./docs/*; npx jsdoc -c ./jsdoc.conf.json --destination ./docs",
    "test": "echo \"Error: no test specified\" && exit 1"
  },
```

The first time we try to generate our documentation the folder won't exist, so we'll see an error from the `rm` command, but the docs will still generate. Many people would find this tolerable, but TBH, I don't, so we can do better 🙂

The Posix `test` command has an alias named `[[` which allows simple tests to be written as `[[ CONDITION ]] && COMMAND` where the command will only execute if the condition is met. The `-e` condition checks for *existence*, so `[[ -e ./docs ]] && rm -rf ./docs/*` will do nothing if there is no `docs` folder, and empty it if there is.

At this stage, the same string `./docs` appears in three places in our command. How easy would it be to forget to update it in one of those three places if we were ever to want to change the name? Too easy!

The solution for that is a shell variable which I'll named `docDir`. On a POSIX shell, a variable is defined with its name immediately followed by an `=` immediately followed by a value — **no spaces**! A variable can be included in a double-quoted string with its name pre-fixed with a dollar sign, so we can define `docDir` with the command `docDir='./docs'`, and then use it in an `rm` command like so: `rm -rf "$docDir/"*`. Putting all that together with the test command we get the following raw Bash command:

```bash
docDir='./docs'; [[ -e "$docDir" ]] && rm -rf "$docDir/"*; npx jsdoc -c ./jsdoc.conf.json --destination "$docDir/"
```

Notice that the raw Bash command contains quotation marks, that means we need to escape those as `\"` when adding them into JSON. That command becomes the following snippet in `package.json`:

```json
 "scripts": {
    "docs": "docDir='./docs'; [[ -e \"$docDir\" ]] && rm -rf \"$docDir/\"*; npx jsdoc -c ./jsdoc.conf.json --destination \"$docDir/\"",
    "test": "echo \"Error: no test specified\" && exit 1"
  },
```

### Example 1 — Automated JSDoc

In the instalment ZIP file you'll find a folder named `pbs132a`, this is a NodeJS project folder containing our example code from last week, our updated `jsdoc.conf.json`, and a `package.json` file that defines our `scripts.docs` command.

Change into this folder in the terminal, then install the NodeJS dependencies with:

```
npm ci
```

Now generate the docs with:

```
npm run docs
```

## Generating Different Documentation for Users and Contributors

As we laid out in instalment 30, we need two versions of our API documentation, one for users of the API we're building, and one for those building the API. Both audiences are developers of course, but by convention I refer to the documentation for the API users as simply *the docs*, and the one for contributors to the API as *the dev docs*. For that reason we'll be saving our regular documentation in `./docs`, and our dev docs in `./docs-dev`.

### Marking Doc Comments as *Private*

The difference between the developer docs and the regular docs is that the developer docs include information on items not exported by the module. If we just add normal doc comments for these elements they'll show up in both sets of documentation, but we can stop that happening by including the `@private` tag in any doc comment that shouldn't be included in the regular docs. To that end I've added `@private` tags to the doc comments for the un-exported (or *inner*) variable and functions in `./src/Replicator.class.mjs`. For example:

```js
/**
 * Test if a given value is a valid replicator charge.
 * @param {*} val - The value to test.
 * @returns {boolean}
 * @see The {@link ChargeAmount} type definition.
 * @private
 */
function isCharge(val){
    return String(val).match(/^\d+$/) ? true : false;
}
```

If you open the documentation generated in the example and navigate to the page for the `PBSReplicator` module you'll see the docs shows just the class, not the `menu` inner variable, or any of the inner functions  like`isCharge()`.

To include private items in the output you need to use the `--private` flag (or set the config variable `opts.private` to `true`).

To generate our dev docs we need to add a new NPM script named `docs-dev` which does almost the same things as `docs`, but uses the target `./docs-dev`, and specifies the `--private` flag:

```json
"scripts": {
  "docs": "docDir='./docs'; [[ -e \"$docDir\" ]] && rm -rf \"$docDir/\"*; npx jsdoc -c ./jsdoc.conf.json --destination \"$docDir/\"",
  "docs-dev": "docDir='./docs-dev'; [[ -e \"$docDir\" ]] && rm -rf \"$docDir/\"*; npx jsdoc -c ./jsdoc.conf.json --destination \"$docDir/\" --private",
  "test": "echo \"Error: no test specified\" && exit 1"
}
```

We can now generate our developer docs with:

```
npm run docs-dev
```

This should create a new folder named `docs-dev`, within which you should find another entire documentation site. Again, open `index.html` in your favourite browser, and navigate to the page for the `PBSReplicator` module. Notice that in these docs the inner variable and functions are included.

## JSDoc Themes

https://www.npmjs.com/package/clean-jsdoc-theme

## Final Thoughts

TO DO