# PBS 141 of X — Generating UML Class Diagrams with Mermaid

In the previous instalment we introduced the concept of UML Class Diagrams, explained the problems they solve, and then looked at the sub-set of the UML Class Diagram specification that's most relevant to JavaScript classes. We looked at three important relationships between classes (inheritance, composition & aggregation), and class members (attributes & functions). We also looked at the *Abstract* class annotation, and how to mark class members as *static*.

We could use our favourite diagraming tools to create UML class diagrams, but we can do better, we can write them in a simple plain-text  markup language and then automatically generate our diagrams from that markup. In this instalment we'll learn how to use the open source Mermaid library to turn text into diagrams!

## Matching Podcast Episode

TO DO

TO DO — INSERT RESOURCES SECTION

## Installing Mermaid

[Mermaid](https://mermaid-js.github.io/mermaid/) is written in JavaScript, and it can be used in many ways. At its most fundamental level its a JavaScript module you can use in your own JavaScript code for creating diagrams, and it's available in NPM as [`mermaid`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/mermaid). There's also a live web interface at [mermaid.live](https://mermaid.live/) which can be useful for experimenting. What we'll be using though is a command line wrapper around the library which is also available in NPM as [`@mermaid-js/mermaid-cli`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@mermaid-js/mermaid-cli).

To use Mermaid, start by creating a folder in which you'll be working, then open that folder in a terminal and install the Mermaid CLI with the command:

```sh
npm install --save @mermaid-js/mermaid-cli
```

Once the package is installed in the folder you'll be able to invoke the CLI version of Mermaid with `npx mmdc`.

## Play Along

If you'd like to play along with the examples in this instalment, open the folder `pbs141-a` from the instalment ZIP in a terminal and install the Mermaid CLI as above.

To be sure `mmdc` is working, build a simple diagram with the command:

```sh
npx mmdc --scale 2 -i helloWorld.mmd.txt -o helloWorld.png
```

This will generate a very simple diagram with two empty classes (`Waffle` & `Pancake`) with no relationship between them:

TO DO – DIAGRAM HERE

If we look at the contents of this demo file we can see what its markup looks like:

```
classDiagram-v2
    class Pancake {
    }
    class Waffle {
    }
```

## Basic Mermaid Syntax

A single Mermaid file can contain multiple diagrams, so the first thing you declare is the type of diagram you are about to define, for us (at least for now), that will always be `classDiagram-v2`. The definitions for a diagram are added underneath the diagram type, indented by a consistent amount.

Each different diagram type has its own rules for adding elements and relationships, but we'll be confining ourselves to just the UML class diagram syntax in this instalment. In fact, since we confined ourselves to just a sub-set of the UML for class diagrams in the previous instalment, we'll be confining ourselves to the matching subset of the Mermaid class diagram syntax. Finally, there are multiple valid Mermaid syntaxes for achieving some things, but to keep things simple we'll be confining ourselves to a single variant. In other words, we'll be looking at just a sub-set of a sub-set of a subset of the full Mermaid syntax!

For much of the language's history there was no syntax for including comments in diagrams, but if your Mermaid parser is modern enough, you can now add comment lines by starting them with two percentage signs followed by a space (`%% some comment`).

## Mermaid Class Diagram Syntax

Once we tell Mermaid we're marking up a class diagram, we're ready to add the classes and the relationships between them.

Something to bear in mind when marking up diagrams in Mermaid is that all your markup is read and processes before any part of the diagram is rendered, this means we can define things in any order we like.

### Adding Classes

Each class definition start with the name of the class, then a space, then an opening curly brace, then one or more lines defining the class' details and finally a closing brace on a line by itself. So, the simplest form of a class definition is simply:

```
class MyClass {
}
```

### Adding Class Annotations

The easiest thing to add to a class is an annotation, we simply add the annotation as a single line wrapped in double chevrons, just like it will appear in the finished diagram:

```
class MyAbstractClass {
	<<abstract>>
}
```

### Adding Class Members

Other than the optional `abstract` annotation, the only other contents our classes can contain are what UML calls members, or what we call attributes and functions. While the syntaxes are different for both, there are some important commonalities.

Firstly, all members are defined one per line. Secondly, all members share the same visibility markers —  `+` for **public**, and  `-` for **private**. Finally, all attributes use the same classifier to mark themselves as **static**, `$`.

#### Attributes

The following syntax covers all the possibilities, but everything other than the name is optional:

```
≪VISIBILITY_MARKER≫≪TYPE≫ ≪NAME≫≪CLASSIFIER≫
```

Note that both the visibility marker and the classifier, if present, **must be joined to** name/type, there cannot be a space between them!

Here are a few basic examples:

```
class MyClass {
	aMostBasicAttribute
	+aBasicPublicAttribute
	-string aPrivarteStringAttribute
	+Date aPublicStaticDateAttribute$
}
```

TO DO — ADD FILE AND IMAGE

#### Functions

Again, the full syntax is below, and everything but the name and the parentheses are optional (if you omit the parentheses Mermaid will assume you defined an attribute):

```
≪VISIBILITY_MARKER≫≪NAME≫(≪PARAMETER_LIST≫)≪CLASSIFIER≫ ≪RETURN_TYPE≫
```

Where `≪RETURN_TYPE≫` can be `void` for functions that don't return anything, and `≪PARAMETER_LIST≫` is a coma-separated list of parameter names with optional types.

For functions there is a second possible classifier, `*` marks a function as **abstract**.

Again, here are a few basic examples:

```
class MyClass {
	-aPrivateStaticFunction()$ void
	+aPublicStaticFunction()$ string
	-aPrivateFunction() number
	+aPublicFunction() boolean
	+aFunctionWithAnUntypedArg(arg1) string
	+aFunctionWithAnArg(number arg1) string
	+aFunctionWith2Args(number arg1, string arg2) string
	+anAbstractFunction()* void
}
```

TO DO — ADD FILE AND IMAGE

### Adding Relationships

TO DO

## Final Thoughts

TO DO
