# PBS 126 of X — Introducing Phase 2

This instalment marks a dramatic change in the structure of this series. Our aims remain un-changed — myself and Allison are working to gently ease you guys into ever more powerful programming activities without overwhelming or intimidating you. Computers shouldn't be intimidating, we should all be able to assert control over them and make them work for us to make our lives better. What's changing is how we'll be organising and structuring our learning.

Because this is such a big change, I want to spend this instalment taking stock of what we've learned to date, what still remains as possible areas of exploration, and how we'll be structuring this series for the next hundred or so episodes.

## Matching Podcast Episode

Listen along to this instalment on [episode 599 of the Chit Chat Across the Pond Podcast](https://www.podfeet.com/blog/2021/09/ccatp-599/).

<audio controls src="https://media.blubrry.com/nosillacast/traffic.libsyn.com/nosillacast/CCATP_2021_09_18.mp3?autoplay=0&loop=0&controls=1">Your browser does not support HTML 5 audio 🙁</audio>

You can also <a href="https://media.blubrry.com/nosillacast/traffic.libsyn.com/nosillacast/CCATP_2021_09_18.mp3" >Download the MP3</a>

## A Lot Done

At this stage in our programming journey we've come a long way — in terms of specifics, we've learned the three core languages that drive client-side web development; HTML for defining what is on a page, CSS for defining how it should look, and JavaScript for defining how it should act. We've also learned to use some specific third party libraries like jQuery, Bootstrap, is.js, Moment.js, and Numeral.js. We've also specifically learned about Git and Chezmoi. However, the specifics are not really what the series is about, those are simply the practical examples of the core concepts the series is really trying to teach. This isn't *Web Programming by Stealth*, it's *Programming by Stealth*. 

The truly valuable things we've learned are core programming concepts like the difference between syntax and semantics — syntactically the `if` statement below is perfect JavaScript, but semantically it's utter nonsense!

```javascript
if(4/0 === 'boogers') console.log('why will this line not print???');
```

We've also learned about variables, types, operators, conditionals, loops, functions, objects, events, and exceptions. None of these concepts are JavaScript-specific, they all exist in other languages too, just with different syntaxes. These are concepts I explicitly taught as part of the series, but I also tried to instil some equally important soft skills too — things like the ability to read documentation and the appropriate vocabulary to describe your problems so you can search for solutions online.

Finally, we've made a start at building out our developer's toolkit with the skills that you need to manage real-world programming projects like documentation generation, testing, and version control.

## A Lot More We Can Do

So far we've seen a single implementation of each concept — HTML for marking up information with semantic meaning, CSS for defining styles, JavaScript's implementation of variables, loops, objects, events, etc., and Git's implementation of version control.

It's time to start consolidating our understanding by re-visiting many of the core concepts in different languages, and our developer's toolbox is badly in need of having some additional tools added (and some old one sharpened). Finally, there are still quite a few concepts we need to meet for the first time.

We have soooo much more to learn — we've utterly ignored the server-side of the web, hence, we've not come across the *Common Gateway Interface* which allows requests from web clients to be answered by code written in literally any programming language invented by human kind. On the client side there is just one markup language, one styling language, and one interaction language with any kind of widespread support — but things couldn't be more different on the server — popular websites are implemented in Java, JavaScript, C#, Ruby, Python, PHP, and there's still a little Perl holding up critical parts of our online lives. Unlike browsers, web servers are expected to store data, so they do that in all sorts of ways — the file system, structured data files like JSON files, traditionally relational databases like MySQL, modern NoSQL solutions like MongoDB, and high-speed short-term key-value caches like Redis. With this exception of JSON, we've not come across any of these concepts yet.

As well as new languages and new concepts, we also need to bulk out our toolbox — we need to learn about entirely new thing like like code linters and package managers, and we need to update and expand our experience with documentation generators and testing frameworks.

All that is just on the web, I also want to expand our horizons beyond the web — we should be able to write command-line tools too, not to mention traditional GUI apps!

## Why a Big Change Now?

In an ideal world, one where I had infinite time, I would keep this series going in the current format until we were done, i.e. for ever, because we'll never be done! But of course, none of us have infinite time, so we have to make tradeoffs.

This series has taken up close to all of my personal nerding-out-time not already taken up by my two podcasts (Let's Talk Apple & Let's Talk Photo). Before this series started I used that time to work on personal coding projects and open source tools, especially my favourite digital child, HSXKPasswd. It's not a coincidence that work on that project has utterly stalled in the last few years, the time and energy I used to put into that is now all going into this series!

XKPasswd has finally reached a crisis point where I can't keep ignoring it, or it will die. The back-end library is written in Perl, a language I adore, but that the world has left behind, it needs to be re-platformed to something with a future, and soon. But there's an even more urgent problem — the www.xkpasswd.net website is still powered by the original V1 Perl version of the library, the server it's on is approaching end-of-live, and that old code can't easily be run on a modern VM. The website design pre-dates the meteoric rise of the smartphone, so it's a train-wreck on mobile devices.

To survive, at all XKPasswd needs two very urgent pieces of work — the core library needs to be migrated to a language with a future, and the website front and backends need to be re-built from scratch. The front end needs to become responsive, and the backend needs to be built on a widely supported server-side technology with a clear future. I've decided that means re-implementing the library as a modern JavaScript package, the web frontend in Bootstrap 5, and the server back-end in PHP.

To thrive, the perl-based command-line tool needs to be re-implemented in a modern language with a future, and since I've decided the library itself should go to JavaScript, that means the best technology for the re-implemented CLI is probably a NodeJS/NPM package, i.e. command-line
 JavaScript.
 
 So, I could put this series on hiatus for at least six months and do all that work by myself, or, I could unite my two biggest personal projects into one, and use the re-platforming and re-designing of HSXKPasswd/xkpasswd.net as a practical vehicle to drive the learning in this series. The latter strikes me as better in every way, so that's what I've chosen to do, hence *Phase 2*.
 
One big advantage I see in this approach is that we'll be learning real-world project management. When it comes to getting bigger coding projects to produce code that actually works, the tools to manage the project are as important as the code for your actual site/app, so by building our learning around a real-world project, we'll get to see those tools in action.
 
 ## The Plan
 
 I've been thinking a lot about how this crazy idea might work, and I've come up with this plan. But, I fully expect it to change as we get stuck in, because as Napoleon apparently said *"no plan survives contact with the enemy"*. So, given the caveat that all this will probably change, here's my thinking as of October 2021.
 
### Milestones

Firstly, these are the milestones I want to drive towards, in order (5 and 6 might get reversed), and the new things we'll need to learn:

1. Re-platform the Perl module `Crypt::HSXKPasswd` to a JavaScript ES 6 module, probably named `HSXKPasswdJS`.
	* ES 6 Modules
	* The Node Package Manager
	* Code Linting (probably with ESLint)
	* Documentation generation (probably with document.js)
	* Test Driven Development for modern JavaScript code (modules, classes, promises, etc.), with one of:
		* Jasmin
		* Mocha
		* QUnit
		* Jest (my current preference, but only just)
2. Re-platform the `xkpasswd.net` website to Bootstrap 5 and the new JavaScript module. (No added functionality.)
	* Bootstrap 5
	* A JavaScript bundler, probably webpack
3. Add support for user accounts to the `xkpasswd.net` site so users can create and save their own custom configs, and perhaps upload their own dictionaries. This will require a website back-end, which will be written in PHP.
	* The Common Gateway Interface (CGI)
	* PHP
	* Databases
4. Port the module to PHP
	* PHP classes
	* Documentation Generation in PHP (probably with PHPDoc)
5. Develop a REST API to allow programatic access to XKPasswd functionality for registered users (so they can develop scripts that fetch passwords from the site programatically, or access the functionality via AJAX from within their own web apps).
	* RESTful APIs
6. Port the command-line app `hsxkpasswd` to JavaScript using NodeJS.
	* 	Javascript programming outside the browser
	* A Javascript CLI framework

### Structure

### Participating

### Milestone 1



## Final Thoughts

