# PBS 131 of X — Introducing JSDoc

In the previous instalment we focused on the philosophy documentation — who the audience is, why they need documentation, and what they need from it. We ended the instalment by introducing JSDoc, a tool for documenting JavaScript code.

The previous instalment was all about why we'll be using JSDoc, this instalment and the one after will focus on how use JSDoc.

## Matching Podcast Episode

TO DO

## Episode Resources

TO DO

## Some Fundamental Concepts

### Static Code Analysers

First and foremost — **JSDoc is a JavaScript static code analyser**, that is to say, it parses your JavaScript code and understands it, but doesn't execute it. A JavaScript interpreter like a web browser or NodeJS parses your code and then executes it, a static analyser performs the same first step, but then it does something else. Without knowing it you've probably already used many static code analysers.

You may have noticed that all IDEs are not equal — some seem positively smarter than others. The less smart ones use regular expressions to do syntax highlighting and little more, but the smart ones perform static code analysis so they can show you where you declared the variable you've currently selected, or list all the variables and functions in a side bar for quick access. IDEs that perform static code analysis can also suggest much more useful code completions because they don't just know that something is a name, but that it's a function, a variable, a class, etc..

You've also had a much more recent encounter with a static code analyser — ESLint! It has to understand your JavaScript to criticise it 😉

Why does it matter that JSDoc is a static code analyser? Firstly, because it means it can automatically discover a lot of information, saving us the need to enter it into the documentation manually, and secondly, because **if you have a syntax error in your code, JSDoc will fail**.

### JSDoc Name Paths

In order to be able to correctly link the various parts of your documentation together, JSDoc has to give every documented aspect of your code a unique name — every variable, function, class, module, etc. must have a unique name. For very basic code that's easy — everything you define sits in a flat universal namespace, but when you start nesting functions, or using modules and classes that stops being the case.

JSDoc uses three separators when building name paths:
* `#` for *instance* variables/functions, e.g. `MyClass#myInstanceVariable`
* `.` for *static* variables/functions, e.g. `MyClass.myStaticFunction`
* `~` for containment, or so-called *inner* functions, variables, or classes, e.g. `myFunction~myInnerFunction`

JSDoc also uses `:`-separated prefixes in the path names for some special elements. For our purposes the  most important of these is `module:` for modules.

Putting it all together, the name path for an instance function named `canHaz` from a class named `LOLCat` in a module named `memes` would be `module:memes~LOLCat#canHaz`.

## The JSDoc Syntax

With JSDoc you write your documentation in your source code, wrapping it in so-called *doc comments*. Those doc comments must appear directly above the item they document, and **items without doc comments are omitted from the documentation**.

Doc comments start with zero or more paragraphs of free-form text, and end with zero or more *block tags*. Both free-form text and block tags can contain *inline tags*.

Many doc tags expect *type definitions*, these are generally surrounded in curly braces.

### Doc Comments

In JavaScript, `/*` starts a multi-line comment, and the comment continues until `*/`. Literally anything can come after that first star and it will be ignored by JavaScript.

Doc comments use this fact to introduce a special kind of comment that's ignored by JavaScript, but interpreted by JSDoc — the so-called *doc comment*. Doc comments start with `/**`, and purely by convention, all lines within the comment are started with a `*`, they end with a regular `*/`.

```js
/*
 * A regular multi-line comment.
 */
 
 /**
  * A doc comment. That extra star is very important!
  */
```

### Block Tags

The vast majority of JSDoc tags are block tags. Block tags are all pre-fixed with `@` symbol and must be the first significant character on a line, that is to say, the first thing after the indentation and the leading `*` symbol. Block tags can span multiple lines, continuing until the doc comment ends or a new block tag is started.

```js
/**
 * A function to return the closest thing a computer can to a pancake!
 * @returns {string} Returns a pancake emoji.
 */
 function getPancake(){
     return '🥞';
 }
```

### Type Definitions

LEFT OFF HERE!!!





## JSDoc Themes

https://www.npmjs.com/package/clean-jsdoc-theme

## Final Thoughts

TO DO