## PBS 160 of X — jq as a Programming Language

In this instalment I want to take a break in learning about new ways the jq language can process data, and talk instead about how we can better use the jq language to do more complex things. So far we have been writting all our jq as single arguments to the `jq` terminal command. This means we need to write all our jq on a single line, so the more complex our filters become, the poorer our experience of writting jq becomes! 

Before we go on to create even more complex jq filters, we're going to learn a better way of writting those filters.

## Matching Podcast Episode

TO DO

## Installment Resources

* The instalment ZIP file — [pbs160.zip](https://github.com/bartificer/programming-by-stealth/raw/master/instalmentZips/pbs160.zip) TO CREATE

## PBS 159 Challenge Solutions

The challenge set at the end of [the previous instalment](./pbs159) was to build a `jq` command to transform the Nobel Prize data set from `NobelPrizes.json` in the installment ZIP into a simplified data structure and save it to a new file `NobelPrizeList.json` in un-pretty-printed JSON format. The simplified file should consist of an array of dictionaries, one for each prize that was actually awarded, and each dictionary should have just the keys `year`, `prize`, `numWinners`, and `winners` where the latter is an array of names as strings.

To build up to a solution, let's start by building a command to return all prizes that were actually awarded. We know a prize was awarded when the dictionary for the prize contains an array named `laureates`, so let's use the `type` command inside a select to filter the list of all prizes down to just those that have a `laureates` array:

```sh
jq '.prizes[] | select((.laureates | type) == "array")' NobelPrizes.json
```

We can now add a final filter to the chain to assemble our desired simplified dictionary, starting with the three simple keys:

```sh
jq '.prizes[] | select((.laureates | type) == "array") | {year: (.year | tonumber), prize: .category, numWinners: (.laureates | length)} ' NobelPrizes.json
```

The final key, the `winners` array is a little more complicated, but only a little. We need to assemble an array, so we will need to wrap the filter for generating the names in square brackets. Then, we just need to generate the names, which we can do by exploding the `laureates` array and building the name with string interpolation (`[.laureates[] | "\(.firstname) \(.surname)"]`). Adding all that into our command it now looks like this:

```sh
jq '.prizes[] | select((.laureates | type) == "array") | {year: (.year | tonumber), prize: .category, numWinners: (.laureates | length), winners: [.laureates[] | "\(.firstname) \(.surname)"]}' NobelPrizes.json
```

We're getting pretty close — we can see sensible results for prizes won by humans:

```json
{
  "year": 1903,
  "prize": "physics",
  "numWinners": 3,
  "winners": [
    "Henri Becquerel",
    "Pierre Curie",
    "Marie Curie"
  ]
}
```

Unfortunately, we're not getting good results for prizes won by organisations:

```json
{
  "year": 1904,
  "prize": "peace",
  "numWinners": 1,
  "winners": [
    "Institute of International Law null"
  ]
}
```

Since there is no `surname` field, the string `"null"` is getting added after the `firstname` field. We can use the *alternate operator* (`//`) inside the string interpolation to add the surname or an empty string — `"\(.firstname) \(.surname // "")"`. Adding that into our command we now have:

```sh
jq '.prizes[] | select((.laureates | type) == "array") | {year: (.year | tonumber), prize: .category, numWinners: (.laureates | length), winners: [.laureates[] | "\(.firstname) \(.surname // "")"]}' NobelPrizes.json
```

This gets us a lot closer to what we want:

```json
{
  "year": 1904,
  "prize": "peace",
  "numWinners": 1,
  "winners": [
    "Institute of International Law "
  ]
}
```

Now we just need to remove the trialing space, and we can do that with the `rtrimstr` function — `rtrimstr(" ")`, so our command now looks like this:

```sh
jq '.prizes[] | select((.laureates | type) == "array") | {year: (.year | tonumber), prize: .category, numWinners: (.laureates | length), winners: [.laureates[] | "\(.firstname) \(.surname // "")" | rtrimstr(" ")]}' NobelPrizes.json
```

Each individual output is now correct, even those for organisations:

```json
{
  "year": 1904,
  "prize": "peace",
  "numWinners": 1,
  "winners": [
    "Institute of International Law"
  ]
}
```

The next problem to solve is that we have a list of dictionaries, not an array of dictionaries. This is easy to fix, simply wrap the entire filter in square braces!

```sh
jq '[.prizes[] | select((.laureates | type) == "array") | {year: (.year | tonumber), prize: .category, numWinners: (.laureates | length), winners: [.laureates[] | "\(.firstname) \(.surname // "")" | rtrimstr(" ") ]}]' NobelPrizes.json
```

We're very nearly at a full-credit soluition now, we just need to encode it as JSON data set rather than pretty-printed JSON. We can do that by adding a final encoding filter to the chain (`@json`), enabling raw output with the `-r` flag, and finally using some terminal plumbing to redirect the output to a file:

```sh
jq -r '[.prizes[] | select((.laureates | type) == "array") | {year: (.year | tonumber), prize: .category, numWinners: (.laureates | length), winners: [.laureates[] | "\(.firstname) \(.surname // "")" | rtrimstr(" ") ]}] | @json' NobelPrizes.json > NobelPrizeList.json
```

The above solution gets full credit, but there was a bonus on offer if, instad of removing the trailing space after it was added, we avoided it ever getting added in the first place. A hint was given that this could be achieved by combining  the alternate operator `//`, the `join` function, and a function we'd not yet met named `empty` that takes no arguments and produces absolute no output of any kind.

This is the full documentation for the `empty` function:

> `empty` returns no results. None at all. Not even `null`.
>
> It's useful on occasion. You'll know if you need it :)

I wasn't sure if we ever would need it, or where it might fit into our series, but it turns out we do need it, and this is the moment when it proves useful!

Rather than building the name as a string, we can create an array with the firstname and optionaly the surname, and then join that array using a single space as the separator. Creating an array with the firstname and surname is easy — `[.firstname, .surname]`. The problem is that this will always result in a two-entry array, either two strings, or one string and a `null`. We need to use the alternate operator in conjunction with the `empty` function to completely omit the surname from the array if there is no surnameb — `[.firstname, .surname//empty]`. Finally, we need to join this array with a single space — `[.firstname, .surname//empty] | join(" ")`.

Substituting in this logic to our previous solution we get the following for the bonus credit:

```sh
jq -r '[.prizes[] | select((.laureates | type) == "array") | {year: (.year | tonumber), prize: .category, numWinners: (.laureates | length), winners: [.laureates[] | [.firstname, .surname//empty] | join(" ")]}] | @json' NobelPrizes.json > NobelPrizeList.json
```

## Running jq Filters from Files

The first step to treating jq as a *'real'* programming language is to switch from writting jq filters as one-line arguments, and to save them to files like we would for any other scripting language.

As a first example, I coppied the jq filter from the bonus challenge solution, un-changed, into a file named `pbs160a-1.jq` in the Installment Zip. We can now run it using the `--from-file` (or `-f-`) flag to read the filter from the file:

```sh
jq -f pbs160a-1.jq NobelPrizes.json
```

Having one hard to read line of text in a file is not really much better than having one hard to read line of text on the terminal, so how can we re-format this example to make it more human-friendly?

### Comments

Like in shell scripts, `#` starts a comment, with the rest of the line being ignored. So, we can add a comment to the top of our file like so:

```jq
# This jq script re-factors the Nobel Prizes data set as published by the Nobel
# prize committee into a simpler form.
# Input:    JSON as published by the Nobel Committee
# Output:   Simplified JSON
```

### Code Layout

If you think about the jq syntax, filters are separated from each other by the pipe symbol (`|`) when you want to chain them, and the comma (`,`) when you want to simply separte them. That means newline characters have no special meaning when it comes to starting or ending a filter, so you are free to break your code over multiple lines how ever you like. I tend to take the following approach:

1. Start non-trivial filters (more than just something very simple like a key name as a function argument) on a new line.
2. Start and end large arrays and dictionaries on new lines, and indent their contents.
3. Pre-fix filter separators (`|` & `,`) to the start of lines

I have not found an official style-guide for jq, so this is not some kind of best-practice. Instead, this approach lines up well with the official style guides for two data querying languages I have experiene with, [Microsoft's KQL](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/data-explorer/kusto/query/queries), and [Splunk's SPL](https://docs.splunk.com/Documentation/SplunkCloud/9.1.2308/SearchReference/WhatsInThisManual).

Applying that logic, I can re-write our example file like so (inclided in the instalment ZIP as `pbs160a-2.jq`):

```jq
# This jq script re-factors the Nobel Prizes data set as published by the Nobel \
# prize committee into a simpler form. \
# Input:    JSON as published by the Nobel Committee \
# Output:   Simplified JSON
[
    .prizes[]
    | select((.laureates | type) == "array")
    | {
        year: (.year | tonumber),
        prize: .category,
        numWinners: (.laureates | length),
        winners: [
            .laureates[]
            | [ .firstname, .surname // empty ]
            | join(" ")
        ]
    }
]
| @json
```

Note that this makes it much easier to see the structure of the dictionaries we are constructing. Also note that when filters are very short, and when it makes their meaning clearer, I do not break them into new lines, even when they are multi-stage pipe-lines, e.g. I keep the definitions for the `year` and `numWinners` keys on a single lines (`year: (.year | tonumber),` & `numWinners: (.laureates | length),`).

### Bonus — Useful jq-Related VS Code Plugins

As I write this instalment (January 2024), my preferred free and open source code editor for all the programming I do is [Microsoft's VS Code](https://code.visualstudio.com). There are two very useful jq-related plugins I install into VS Code.

The most important one is [jq Syntax Highlighting](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=jq-syntax-highlighting.jq-syntax-highlighting) which teaches VS Code how to syntax highlight `.jq` files.

The second is [vscode-jq](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=dandric.vscode-jq), a very useful plugin for working with JSON files. This plugin adds support for jq right into the VS Code command pallet. With this plugin installed, when you have a JSON file open you can search it with a jq filter right in VS Code. You simply bring up the command pallet (**View** → **Command Pallet …** in the menu, or **shift** + **cmd** + **P** on a Mac), enter the command `jq` to activate the plugin, then type your jq filter and hit enter again to run it. The results of applying your filter to the open JSON file will appear in VS Code's output pane.

## Debugging

As you build more complex filters, it becomes ever more useful to print debug messages at various points within your pipeline to check your assumptions about the current form of the data. This is where the `debug` function comes to the rescue. You can insert this function anywhere in your filter chain without disrupting the flow of data because it passe its inputs straight through un-changed, but it also prints the input or a message of your choosing to standard error (`STDERR`).

Note that Taming the Terminal instalments [15](https://ttt.bartificer.net/book.html#ttt15) (['plumbing'](https://ttt.bartificer.net/book.html#ttt15)) and [16](https://ttt.bartificer.net/book.html#ttt16) ([crossing the streams](https://ttt.bartificer.net/book.html#ttt16)) describe the three default streams and how  they can be redirected.

When you call the debug function without arguments it writes a compressed rendering of its input to `STDERR` in the following format:

```text
["DEBUG:",<input-value>]
```

We can see this in action by adding a call to `debug` into the filter chain of the `jq` command we built in the previous instalment to render friend of the NosillaCast Dr. Andrea Ghez's Nobel Prize as a string. We're inserting it just before the string interpolation filter, so it will show the dictionary that will act as the input for that final filter:

```sh
jq -r '.prizes[] | .laureates[]? | select(.surname == "Ghez") | debug | "\(.firstname) \(.surname) was awarded her prize for \(.motivation)"' NobelPrizes.json
```

Running this command creates two outputs, the debug output which was written to `STDERR`, and the `jq` command's regular output which was written to `STDOUT`:

```text
["DEBUG:",{"id":"990","firstname":"Andrea","surname":"Ghez","motivation":"\"for the discovery of a supermassive compact object at the centre of our galaxy\"","share":"4"}]
Andrea Ghez was awarded her prize for "for the discovery of a supermassive compact object at the centre of our galaxy"
```

Because both `STDOUT` and `STDERR` and connected to the terminal by default, the outputs appear to be the same, but they can be separated using standard terminal redirection, so, if we redirect `STDOUT` to the file `citation.txt` we will still see the debug message in the terminal, but the output will go into the text file:

```sh
jq -r '.prizes[] | .laureates[]? | select(.surname == "Ghez") | debug | "\(.firstname) \(.surname) was awarded her prize for \(.motivation)"' NobelPrizes.json > citation.txt
```

If you want to write a custom debug message, you can use the one-argument for of `debug` to specify what to output.

It's very common to use string interpolation for this, for example we could use the debug statement `debug("We have the following keys: \(. | keys)")` to build a string that starts with the text `"We have the following Keys: "` and then inserts all the keys in the dictionary currently being processed by piping the current value (`.`) to the `keys` function which returns an array of all keys in a dictionary. Substituting that debug call into our example above we get:

```sh
jq -r '.prizes[] | .laureates[]? | select(.surname == "Ghez") | debug("We have the following keys: \(. | keys)") | "\(.firstname) \(.surname) was awarded her prize for \(.motivation)"' NobelPrizes.json > citation.txt
```

Which now write the following to `STDERR`:

```text
["DEBUG:","We have the following keys: [\"firstname\",\"id\",\"motivation\",\"share\",\"surname\"]"]
```

When you're working with multiple input files it can be useful to include the name of the file the data currently being processed came from within your debug outputs, this is what the built-in jq function `input_filename` is for. As an example, you'll find two files in the installment ZIP, `ip-bartb.json` & `ip-podfeet.json` each containing a single top-level dictionary with information about the IP addresses of `bartb.ie` and `podfeet.com`. We can process both files at once with the `jq` command, and the value of `input_filename` will change as each file is processed:

```sh
jq 'debug("processing file \(input_filename), ip is \(.ipAddress)")' ip-*.json > /dev/null
```

Note that this command ignores standard output by redirecting `STDOUT` to `/dev/null`, the computer's virtual blackhole. This makes it easy to see the output from the debug filter:

```text
["DEBUG:","processing file ip-bartb.json, ip is 37.139.7.12"]
["DEBUG:","processing file ip-podfeet.json, ip is 104.21.34.68"]
```

## Defining Variables

Potential example — prizes with and above average number of winners

## If-the-else

## Try-catch

## Loops

Done using the `as` operator — very counter-intuitive, will probably leave this out.



## EPISODE BREAK — Mathematical Operators & Functions

Let's start nice and simple, the jq language supports the usual suspects in terms of mathematical operators:

| Operator | Description        | Example                      |
| -------- | ------------------ | ---------------------------- |
| `+`      | Addition           | `jq -n '1 + 1'` produces `2` |
| `-`      | Subtraction        | `jq -n '3 - 1'` produces `2` |
| `*`      | Multiplication     | `jq -n '2 * 1'` produces `2` |
| `/`      | Division           | `jq -n '4 / 2'` produces `2` |
| `%`      | Modulo (remainder) | `jq -n '5 % 3'` produces `2` |

Note the use of the `-n` flag in the examples to tell the `jq` command not to expect any input to process.

Something to notice is that the jq language does not support the increment and decrement operators `++` and `--`.

As well as these operators, the jq language also provides built in functions for performing arithemtic.

To make the examples shorter to write and easier to interpret we'll use a pair of JSON files from the instalment ZIP in our examples. First, we'll use `numbers.json` which contains a single top-level array of numbers:

```json
[
	-42,
	0,
	3.1415,
	11
]
```

And we'll also use `menu.json` which contains a top-level array of dictionaries, each contianing keys that are numeric:

```json
[
	{
		"name": "hotdogs",
		"price": 5.99,
		"stock": 143
	},
	{
		"name": "pancakes",
		"price": 3.10,
		"stock": 43
	},
	{
		"name": "waffles",
		"price": 7.50,
		"stock": 14
	}
]
```

Note that some of these functions can tolerate having non-numbers sent to them, but many will throw errors for at least some non-numeric data types, so to be safe, only send numbers through these functions. Another thing to watch out for is that even when non-numeric values don't cause errors they can produce unexpected results, e.g. the absolute value of a string represatation of a negative number is the same string, un-changed — `jq -n '"-9.999" | abs'` outputs `"-9.999"`.

| jq Function         | Description                                                  | Example                                                      |
| ------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
| `abs`               | Outputs the absolute value of the input.                     | `jq .[]|abs` outputs`42`, `0`, `3.1415` & `11`               |
| `floor`             | Rounds input decimal numbers down to the integer part.       | `jq -n '3.1415 | floor'` outputs `3`, and `jq -n '9.999 | floor'` outputs `9` |
| `sqrt`              | Outputs the square root of the input.                        |                                                              |
| `min`               | Outputs the minimum value from an input array of numbers.    | `jq '. | min' numbers.json` outputs `-42`                    |
| `max`               | Outputs the maximum value from an input array of numbers.    | `jq '. | max' numbers.json` outputs `11`                     |
| `min_by(.KEY_PATH)` | Outputs the dictionary in an input array of dictionaries that has the minimum value for a given key. | `jq -c '. | min_by(.stock)' menu.json` outputs `{"name":"waffles","price":7.50,"stock":14}` |
| `max_by(.KEY_PATH)` | Outputs the dictionary in an inpuit array of dictionaries that has the maximum value for a given key. | `jq -c '. | max_by(.price)' menu.json` outputs `{"name":"waffles","price":7.50,"stock":14}` |

Those are the arithmetic functions provided by the jq language itself, but the `jq` command has a mathematical trick up its sleeve! All the standard 1, 2 & 3 argument C arithmetic functiuons from C's standard math library can be used in jq. 

For reason's I can't quite fathom the way in which one-argument C functions and two or three argument C functions get mapped to jq are not consistent. For one-argument C functions the input to the jq function gets passed as the C function's argument. But, for two and three argument C functions all arguments need to be specified in jq.

The exact functions available will depend on the version of the C libaries installed on the computer, but some widely available useful ones of note are:

| C Maths Function | Description                                                  | Example                                                      |
| ---------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
| `ceil`           | Round an input decimal number up to the nearest integer. An obvious companion for jq's built-in `floor` and C's `round` functions. | `jq -n '3.1415 | ceil'` outputs `4`, and `jq -n '9.999 | ceil'` outputs `10` |
| `round`          | Round an input decimal number up or down to the nearest integer. An obvious companion for jq's built-in `floor` and C's `ceil` functions. | `jq -n '3.1415 | round'` outputs `3`, and `jq -n '9.999 | round'` outputs `10` |
| `pow`            | Raise an input number to the power passed as the first argument. | `jq -n '2 | pow(.; 3)'` outputs `8`                          |

## Transforming Strings

As well as allowing us to transform numbers, the jq languages provides many mechanisms for transforming strings.

### 'Adding', 'Multipling' & 'dividing' Strings (Operator Overloading)

The jq language has, to use programming jargon *overloaded* some of it's operators, including the addition (`+`) operator. Overloaded operators do different things when presented with different types of data to operate on. Many programming languages use overloading, and while we may not have called it out by name when we expored JavaScript, we did see operator overloading when we used `+` both for arithmetic addition, and for string concatenation.

Note that the jq language's support of operator overloading is basic compared to what we saw with JavaScript. JavaScript's operator overloading can handle different data types on each side of the operator, and them automatically *casts* (i.e. converts) one of the two to match the other before applying the appropriate action. This requires complex rules for determining what to do for every possible combination of types. In jq things are much simpler — with just a few specific exceptions, **the types on each side of the overloaded operators must match**! 

Bringing this back to strings, like in JavaScript, jq's `+` operator is overloaded for both arithmentic addition and string concatenation  i.e. when both inputs are numbers they get added, and when both are strings they get concatenated:

```sh
# two numbers - arithmetic addition (as above)
jq -n '22 + 20' # oputputs 42

# two strings - concatenation
jq -n '"a string" + " another string"' # oputputs "a string another string"

# mismatched types
jq -n '"a string" + 42' # throws an error
```

As we'll learn later, the `+` operator is even more overloaded than this, it can also handle arrays and dictionaries!

The multiplication operator (`*`) is also overloaded, and it is one of those where a specific mis-match of types is explicitly supported — you can multiply a string by a number to concatenate it with itself that many times, in other words, to repeat it that many times:

```sh
jq -n '"Ho" * 3' # outputs "HoHoHo"
```

Finally, the division operator `/` has been overloaded to work with two strings — when a string is divided by another string, the string to the left is split on the string to the right, and an array is returned. In other words, **string division with `/` is an shortcut for the `split` function**.

```sh
jq -nc '"10:20:30" / ":"' # outputs ["10","20","30"]
```

### Built-in String Functions

The jq language provides a selection of built-in functions for manipulating strings, some of the more useful ones are listed below:

| Function         | Description                                                  | Example                                                      |
| ---------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
| `ascii_downcase` | Convert an input string to lower case.                       | `jq -n '"Somethin" | ascii_downcase'` outputs `"something"`  |
| `ascii_upcase`   | Convert an input string to upper case.                       | `jq -n '"Something" |ascii_upcase'` outputs `"SOMETHING"`    |
| `ltrimstr`       | Remove a given prefix from an input string, or return the string un-changed if the prefix is not present. | `jq -n '"DEBUG: something" | ltrimstr("DEBUG: ")'` outputs `"something"` |
| `rtrimstr`       | Remove a given postfix from an input string, or return the string un-changed if the postfix is not present. | `jq -n '"something (DEBUG)" | rtrimstr(" (DEBUG)")'` outputs `"something"` |
| `sub`            | Perform string substitution on an input string to produce the output string. A regular expression should be passed as the first argument, a replacement as the second, and optionally regular expression flags as a third. | `jq -n '"2023-11-12: Something" | sub("[0-9]{4}-[0-9]{2}-[0-9]{2}: "; "")'` outputs `"Something"`, i.e. replaces a leading timestamp with an empty string. |

## Altering Arrays

Now that we've seen how to alter strings, let's take a look at way of transforming arrays.

### Re-Ordering Arrays (`sort` & `reverse`)

Let's start with the simplest type of array transformation — re-orderings.

The simplest re-ordering is a straight forward reversing, and jq provides just that with the `reverse` function:

```sh
jq -nc '[1, 2, 3] | reverse' # outputs [3,2,1]
```

Then of course we have array sorting.

When you have an array with simple values the built-in `sort` function will generally do what you want.

The function requires an array as input, and it will first group elements by type, starting with any `null` elements, then any booleans, then numbers, then strings, then arrays, and finally dictionaries. Within each grouping it will then perform the most sensible sorting, `false` before `true` for Booleans, numeric sorting for numbers, and alphabetic (lexical) sorting for strings. (Note that the rules for sorting arrays and dictionaries exist, but are out of the scope of this series).

Let's see the `sort` function in action:

```sh
# numbers
jq -nc '[1, 4, 3] | sort' # outputs [1,3,4]

# strings
jq -nc '["popcorn", "waffles",  "pancakes"] | sort' 
# outputs ["pancakes","popcorn","waffles"]

# mixed types
jq -nc '[42, true, 11, "waffles", false,  "pancakes"] | sort'
# outputs [false,true,11,42,"pancakes","waffles"]
```

When dealing with arrays containing more complicated elements like other arrays or dictionaries, you probably want to specify your own rule for sorting, you can do this with th `sort_by` function. It takes as an argument a filter, and that filter will be applied to each array element, and the elements will be sorted based on the results of applying the filter. Usually the filter is simply a dictionary key.

For example, we can re-order our menu (from the `menu.js` file in the instalment ZIP), with:

```sh
jq 'sort_by(.price)' menu.json
```

This outputs:

```json
[
  {
    "name": "pancakes",
    "price": 3.10,
    "stock": 43
  },
  {
    "name": "hotdogs",
    "price": 5.99,
    "stock": 143
  },
  {
    "name": "waffles",
    "price": 7.50,
    "stock": 14
  }
]
```

As you can see, the array is now sorted by price.

### Adding and Removing Elements with the  `+` & `-` Operators

As mentioned earlier, the `+` operator has been overloaded to perform a useful action when both inputs are arrays — it merges them into a new bigger array:

```sh
# Note: -n for no input & -c for compact output
jq -nc '[1, 2] + [3, 4]' # outputs [1,2,3,4]
```

While the `-` operator is not overloaded for strings, it is overloaded for arrays, and can be used create a new array with elements removed. The array to the left of the `-` is treated as the original array, and the elements in the array to the right of the `-` are removed from the original array, if present, to create the output array.

```sh
jq -nc '[1, 2, 3, 4] - [4, 5]' # outputs [1,2,3]
```

### Array Deduplication

When you start adding arrays together it's easy to end up with duplucates that you may well not want. The jq language provides two useful functions for removing them.

Firstly, the simple `unique` function returns the input array sorted with any duplicated elements removed. The input must be an array. For exmaple:

```sh
jq -nc '[4, 1, 4, 3, 2] | unique' # outputs [1,2,3,4]
```

If you need a more complex definition of 'uniqueness' you can use the `unique_by` function to supply your own filter as an argument. The output array will only contain one element which the filter evaluates to a given value. If multiple elements evaluate to the same value, one will be kept, but there's no guarantee as to which one it will be. Also note that the elements in the output array will be sorted based on the result of the filter.

As a somewhat contrived example, we can make our menu (from `menu.json` above) unique by length of name. Before we do, let's compute the lengths see what results we expect, we can do that with:

```sh
jq '.[] | .name | length' menu.json
```

This shows that hotdogs and waffles have 7 letters, and pancakes 8. We would expect to always get pancakes in our answer, but only one of waffles or hotdogs when we make the menu unique by name. Let's try:

```sh
jq 'unique_by(.name | length)' menu.json
```

This gives us the output:

```json
[
  {
    "name": "hotdogs",
    "price": 5.99,
    "stock": 143
  },
  {
    "name": "pancakes",
    "price": 3.10,
    "stock": 43
  }
]
```

As expected, we get one item with a name of length 7, the one with a name of length 8, because the items are sorted on the result of the filter as well as deduplicated based on it.

### Flattening Nested Arrays

When assembling an array from multiple sources you may end up with an array of arrays when you actually wanted a single unified array. This is where the built-in `flatten` function comes in.

The `flatten` function takes an array as in input, and if it contains other arrays, it replaces them with their entries in the output array. The funtion applies this logic recursively, so you if your array contains arrays which contain arrays, it will still flatten them all out to a single array of all the values.

```sh
jq -nc '[1, [2, 3], [4, [5, 6]]] | flatten'
# outputs [1,2,3,4,5,6]
```

By default the flatten function will keep recursing down into all nested arrays, but you can pass an optional argument to limit how deep it goes. To see what this means, let's repeat our above example with limits of 2 and 1:

```sh
# limit to a depth of 2
# arrays in the input array, and arrays in arrays in the input array
jq -nc '[1, [2, 3], [4, [5, 6]]] | flatten(2)'
# outputs [1,2,3,4,5,6]

# limit to a depth of 1
# arrays in the input array only
jq -nc '[1, [2, 3], [4, [5, 6]]] | flatten(1)'
# outputs [1,2,3,4,[5,6]]
```

### The `map` Function

After `select`, the most powerful function in `jq` is probably `map`. It takes an array as an input, and a filter as an argument, and it returns a new array containing the result of applying the filter to each element of the input array. In effect, it lets you **loop over an aray in a single function call**, and **process each element without exploding the array**.

Fo example, we can convert all the numbers in an array to their absolute values with:

```sh
jq -nc '[1, -2, 3, -42] | map(. | abs)'
# outputs [1,2,3,42]
```

Note that, like with the `select` function, the special `.` symbol means *'the current value being processed'*. That means that when processing the first element in the input array in the example above `.` is `1`, then it's `-2`, and so on.

## Dictionary Manipulation

### Adding and Removing Keys

As mentioned earlier, the `+` operators is overloaded for handling dicrtionaries. When two dictionaries are added together, a new dictionary is created containing the keys and values from both. If both input dictionaries define a value for the same key, the value from the dictionary on the right of the `+` operator is used.

If the dictionaries contain dictionaries, a recursive merge can be done by using the `*` operator instead of the `+` operator.

You might imagine key could comehow be removed with an overloaded subtraction operator, but alas not, we need to use the built-in `del` function for that. This function requires a dictionary as the input, and a key path as an argument. For example, we could remove the stock key from each item in our menu (`menu.js` from the instalment ZIP) with:

```sh
jq '.[] | del(.stock)' menu.json
```

Which returns:

```json
{
  "name": "hotdogs",
  "price": 5.99
}
{
  "name": "pancakes",
  "price": 3.10
}
{
  "name": "waffles",
  "price": 7.50
}
```

Note we expoloded the array in this example, so we now have a list of separate output values instead of a single array. We can combin the `del` function with the `map` function to avoid exploding the array:

```sh
jq 'map(del(.stock))' menu.json
```

This returns a single array containing the updated dictionaries:

```json
[
  {
    "name": "hotdogs",
    "price": 5.99
  },
  {
    "name": "pancakes",
    "price": 3.10
  },
  {
    "name": "waffles",
    "price": 7.50
  }
]
```
