# PBS 144 of X — Shell Tests

In [the previous instalment](./pbs144) we learned that exit codes are the shell's answer to booleans, and that they are the key to conditionals and loops. So, How do you convert logical expressions to exit codes? The answer is the `test` command and it's more advanced descendant, the `[[` construct.

TO EXPAND

## Matching Podcast Episode

TO DO

## Episode Resources

TO UPDATE

* The instalment ZIP file — [pbs144.zip](https://github.com/bartificer/programming-by-stealth/raw/master/instalmentZips/pbs144.zip)

## In the Beginning there was the `test` Command

To understand why we'll do things the way we will, it's important to start from the beginning, and work forward to how Bash made things easier for use scripters.

The original shell did not provide any kind of built-in construct for doing any kind of tests of comparisons, it simply relied on a command named `test` which evaluated a simple expression and returned an exit code of `0` or `1` depending on whether or not the expression evaluated to `true` or `false`.

The test command supported a number of operators, and since it was a terminal command, it used regular command line arguments for input. Most operators worked on two values, that but some worked on a single value, so the test command accepted arguments in these two forms:

```sh
# operators that work on two values
test value1 -operator value2

# operators that work on single values
test -operator value
```

For backwards compatibility, the `test` command still exists in most modern shells, including Bash and Zsh, so we can demonstrate the `test` command with two simple examples.

First, let's use an operator that works on two values, `=` to check if our current directory equals our home directory:

```bash
test "$PWD" = ~ && echo "You're home\!"
```

A few things to note here — firstly, the environment variable `$PWD` contains your *present working directory*, and `~` gets expanded by Bash to the path to your home directory. Secondly, note that the spaces around the `=` operator really matter — `=` is the second argument to the `test` command, so it needs those spaces either sides as argument separators. Also, if we *cuddled* the `=` we'd be doing a variable assignment, which is not at all the same as a comparison! Thirdly, note that we quoted the variable in double quotes, this is needed or the command will fail to work correctly if the path has a space in it.

Finally, let's demonstrate the use of an operator that works on a single value, the `-e` operator, to check if a path *exists*:

```bash
test -e ~/.bash_history && echo "You have a Bash History file\!"
```

## From `test` to `[`

Not only is the `test` command rather verbose, it's very hard to tell that a comparison is being made at a glance. To make comparisons stand out more, shells started to alias the symbol `[` to the `test` command, and the `test` command was updated to ignore an optional final argument of `]`. This meant you could use `[` instead of `test`, and mark the end of our test with a purely decorative `]`. This makes a huge difference in terms of readability:

```sh
# first example re-written
[ "$PWD" = ~ ] && echo "You're home\!"

# second example re-written
[ -e ~/.bash_history ] && echo "You have a Bash History file\!"
```

Notice that because we're still just calling a command, even if it is an oddly named one, we still need to quote our our variables in case they have spaces in their values, and the shell will still expand `~` to be the path to our home directory. Finally, I want to draw your attention to how important it is not to cuddle the square brackets — the`[` is a command, so it must be separated from its first argument by a space, and the `]` is the final argument, so it must be separated from the previous argument by a space.

## Next Generation Testing with `[[`

This hackery with aliases, and with using commands instead of native keywords lead to messy code and subtle bugs as scripters got caught out by forgetting to quote their variables and/or unexpected shell expansions from *file globbing* like `*` getting expanded into a list of file names.

For this reason, when Bash was invented as an improvement over the traditional `sh` shell, an actual keyword was added to the language, and that keyword has been retained in Zsh. If everyone had gotten used to `[`, how could you denote an improved alternative? By making the keyword `[[` and requiring a closing `]]` at the end of the expression!

For the most part, `[[` behaves just like `test`, supporting the same operators, and expecting its *arguments* in the same order, but it's different in two important ways — firstly, file globbing is not supported, so `*` does not expand to a list of files, and secondly, variables do not need to be escaped. So, we can re-write our examples as:

```bash
# first example re-re-written
[[ $PWD = ~ ]] && echo "You're home\!"

# second example re-re-written
[[ -e ~/.bash_history ]] && echo "You have a Bash History file\!"
```
Note that you still can't cuddle the `[[` or `]]` keywords.

To avoid weird bugs **always use `[[` and `]]` in Bash and Zsh**, never use `[`!

### Bash/Zsh Tests

TO DO

## Bash Conditionals

Now that we know how to use the `[[` keyword to define tests, let's look at how sh/Bash/Zsh implement conditionals. We'll start with the basic `if` keyword, and then look at efficiently dealing with multiple possible values for a variable with the `case` keyword.

### Basic Conditionals with `if`

TO DO

### Multiple Conditions with `case`

TO DO

## Final Thoughts

TO DO
