# PBS 118 of X — JavaScript Apps with GitHub Pages

Before we finish our look at Git and GitHub be learning how to interact with the open source community, let's take a little detour into one of GitHub's nicest little bonus features — GitHub Pages. Basically, GitHub pages gives you free basic web hosting managed with Git!

GitHub pages is not a LAMP stack, so you can't run server-side web apps like Wordpress or Drupal on it, but it's still a very useful and powerful free tool. It's generally used for one or more of the following:

1. Host an open source project's home page
2. Host the documentation for the code in a repository
3. Host a live working version of client-side web app

Our focus is going to be on the third of these options, but we'll mention the others too.

## Matching Podcast Episode

TO DO

## Static Sites -v- Static Site Generators -v- Dynamic Sites

GitHub Pages is a static site generator, so let's take a moment to understand what that means.

When your browser visits as web page it asks the server for the HTML for a specific URL. The server replies to the browser with some HTML, and the browser renders it. How the server figures out the HTML to return is central to understanding the difference between static sites, dynamic sites, and their strange half-way-house cousin the static site generator.

### Static Sites

With a static site the web server simply returns the contents of an HTML file. Everything we have done to date in this series has been in the form of static content. We've written files, placed them in a web server'd document root folder, and the web server has returned them to our browser completely un-changed. The HTML the browser receives is exactly what we wrote, completely un-changed.

### Dynamic Sites

A dynamic site sits at the very other end of the spectrum. The web server generates the HTML returned to the browser by executing code written by the web developer. In other words, the developer writes the code that creates the HTML that the browser renders. The HTML is calculated on-demand at the moment the web server receives the request. This makes it possible for every visitor to see different content at the same URL. When I log in to Twitter I'm at the same URL you are, but I see different content that you do. The Twitter servers are executing the same code, but with different inputs, resulting in different HTML.

Because the code to create the HTML is run by the web server, not the web browser, it's referred to as *server-side code*, and the most popular server-side coding language these days is PHP. Popular blogging platforms and content management systems like Wordpress and Drupal are written in PHP.

We've not yet made it to the server side in this series, but that is where we're going next when we move on to PHP.

### Static Site Generators (SSGs)

A static site generator is somewhere between a static site and a dynamic site. Some or all of the HTML is still programatically generated, but not by the web server, and not at the moment a browser requests a URL.

A static site generator takes input of some form, often HTML with some additional template-like syntax added, or another markup language like Markdown, and builds HTML files that are then uploaded to the web server which serves the resulting HTML files as a static site.

Dynamic pages are generated each time a URL is accessed, static site generators generate the HTML only when the developer tells them to, and the same resulting HTML files are then served out over and over again until the site is re-generated by the developer.

## GitHub Pages and Jekyll

GitHub Pages are static sites generated using the free and open source static site generator [Jekyll](https://jekyllrb.com).

One of the reasons Jekyll is a great fit for GitHub pages is that it can deploy a site without making a single change, or, it can generate sites from inputs that don't contain a single HTML tag, and its behaviour can be controlled at a per-file level.

In fact, if you write traditional static websites and deploy them GitHub Pages you'll never even know there was an SSG involved in the process, all your files will appear on the internet completely un-changed!

On the other hand, if you love Markdown you can create an entire website writing nothing but Markdown and get a beautiful website out the other end.

If you choose to make use of Jekyll's functionality, then it's very helpful to understand that Jekyll did not invent its own templating language, instead, it uses the open source [Liquid templating engine](https://github.com/Shopify/liquid/wiki) developed by Shopify. The syntax is quite similar to that used by the [Mustache templating engine](https://github.com/janl/mustache.js/) we've used in this series.

### A Simple Rule of Thumb — `.md` Turns Jekyll on and `.html` Turns it Off

As a general rule, if you want Jekyll to build your GitHub Pages for you, write in Markdown and commit your files with the `.md` file extension, and if you want to write your own HTML and have Jekyll leave it alone, commit your files with the `.html` file extension.

That's a general rule, and it describes GitHub Pages and Jekyll's default behaviour, you can of course force Jekyll to publish un-altered Markdown files, and, to parse HTML files which contain Jekyll-specific markup, but those are much rarer use-cases, and outside the scope of this series.

### GitHub Pages' Specifics

Every GitHub pages site is powered by Jekyll, but there's a little more to it than that. GitHub gave chosen to expand Jekyll by adding additional features of their own. So, while any Jekyll site can be published on GitHub Pages, not every GitHub pages can be published by Jekyll.

One of the additions GitHub added was a default theme of their own making which is used by default when rendering Markdown files. I find it a very tasteful theme, but it's a little too plain for some people's liking 🙂

GitHub doesn't just provide a default theme, it also provides a gallery of more opinionated themes to choose from. And, if you're prepared to get a little more in the weeds and edit Jekyll config files, the ability to design your own theme from scratch, or, link to any other theme hosted on a publicly accessible Git server.

GitHub also partnered with [Let's Encrypt](https://letsencrypt.org) to make HTTPS available on all GitHub Pages sites free of charge.

By default GitHub Pages sites are published under the `github.io` domain. For example, the GitHub Pages URL for a repo named `boogers` belonging to a user with the username `smartypants` would be published at `https://smartypants.github.io/boogers`.

However, if you own your own domain and are happy to add a simple DNS record you can publish a GitHub Pages site on your own domain, or a subdomain of your own domain.

Since this series moved from my personal blog to its current home, [pbs.bartificer.net](https://pbs.bartificer.net/), it's been published using GitHub Pages! This text you're reading now was written in Markdown and it gets converted to HTML by Jekyll each time I commit a change.

Because this series, like pretty much everything I do outside of my day-job, is open source, you can see the source for this site for yourself in the `docs` folder on the ([programming-by-stealth` repo](https://github.com/bartificer/programming-by-stealth). I've also released the theme as open source via the ([`bartificer-jekyll-theme` repo](https://github.com/bartificer/bartificer-jekyll-theme).

### GitHub Pages & Jekyll Resources

If you're interested in learning more about GitHub Pages, Jekyll, or Liquid, you might find some of these links helpful:

* The official Jekyll documentation — [jekyllrb.com/…](https://jekyllrb.com/docs/)
* Liquid provides two sets of documentation, one for developers integrating Liquid into their apps (i.e. for people like the Jekyll devs), and one for people using Liquid templates. For us, it's the latter that are important, which the Liquid project refer to as being *for designers* — [github.com/…](https://github.com/Shopify/liquid/wiki/Liquid-for-Designers)
* The GitHub Pages documentation — [docs.github.com/…](https://docs.github.com/en/pages)
* GitHub's Markdown documentation — [guides.github.com/…](https://guides.github.com/features/mastering-markdown/)

## Triggering a Jekyll Build on GitHub Pages

If you were using Jekyll stand-alone you'd need to execute it yourself each time you changed your input files, but with GitHub pages the entire process is automated. You trigger a re-build of your site by committing a change to your repository's default branch (usually `main` these days, but `master` on older repos).

## Enabling GitHub Pages

GitHub Pages is an optional feature on every GitHub repo. There is a dedicated section of each repository's settings page for controlling it. 

Start by opening the repository's settings page:

SCREENSHOT 1

Then choose *Pages* from the menu:

SCREENSHOT 2

To get started we have to choose a source for the site's files. The first step is to pick a branch, then, GitHub will give you two choices — use all the files on that branch as the source for the website, or, use the contents of the top-level `docs` folder:

SCREENSHOT 3

As a general rule, if you point of the website is to be an added-extra to a project like a hope page and/or a documentation page, then choose `/docs`, otherwise, if the purpose of the repo is to be the source code for the site, use the root folder (`/`).

Once you've chosen a source and saved it, you'll get a notification of the site's URL, and additional options will appear.

SCREENSHOT 4

You'll notice that if you don't use  custom domain, HTTPS is on, and you don't get a say in the matter — the checkbox to turn it off is disabled!

If you own a domain and want to use it, or, a subdomain, simply enter it in the custom domain field, and then add the DNS CNAME record it will instruct you to add.

## A Worked Example

TO DO

## Final Thoughts

TO DO
