# PBS 103 of X — Getting Started With Git

In the previous instalment we looked at Git from a theoretical point of view — we look at what a repository is, and how data is stored. In this instalment we'll move from theory into practice, and create our first Git repository. 

If you'd like to play along you'll need to meet these two prerequisites:

1. You have installed a version of Git on your computer. The Git homepage list many options — [git-scm.com/…](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Getting-Started-Installing-Git).
2. You are comfortable enough on the command line to navigate to a folder and execute some instructions. (Shameless plug for our free Taming the Terminal podcast & eBook — [ttt.bartificer.net/…](https://ttt.bartificer.net/) 😉).

Even if you don't meet these prerequisites, or if you only ever want to use a Git GUI, don't skip this instalment. Knowing what's happening under the hood will help you make better use of Git GUIs!

PLAYER HERE

## Some Quick Revision

The first vital take-away from the previous instalment is that a Git repository has three parts:

1. A **database** that permanently stores committed versions of your creative project.
2. A **working copy** of the files and folders that make up your creative project.
3. An **index** which manages the transition of changes made on the working copy into the database through the use of a staging area (and optional stashes which we'll ignore for now).

The second key takeaway is that a *commit* is a snapshot of the complete state of your creative project.

With the exception of the initial commit, commits are linked to the commit that came before them, creating a chain of changes that reaches all the way back to the initial commit. Many commits can share the same previous commit, so the end result is a branching collection of chains spreading out from the initial commit. Each path from the initial commit to the current final commit on one of these chains is referred to as a *branch*, and we get to name these branches.

## The Git Command

Rather than provide a suite of separate commands for each possible Git action, all Git's functionality is exposed via a single command — `git`. The first argument to `git` will always be the specific Git action you wish to perform, so you'll often see Git commands described with the first argument, e.g. *'use the `git commit` command to create a commit'*.

The different Git actions are referred to as *subcommands*, so in the example above, `commit` is the subcommand. While there is a `man` page for the `git` command, it's important to remember that there are separate `man` pages for each Git subcommand, and they are named `git-SUBCOMMAND`, e.g. `man git-commit` for the `commit` subcommand.

## Configuring Git

Git does not need much configuration, but it is important to understand how Git stores the few configuration settings it uses.

### Sections & Keys

Git's settings are grouped into related groupings called *sections*. Within each section the individual settings are key-value pairs. Git refers to each setting as `SECTION.KEY`. As a practical example, Git stores your name in a key named `name`  in the `user` section, so you reference the settings as `user.name`.

### Three Setting Levels 

When Git tries to figure out the value for any given setting it searches in three places, and it does that search in the following order:

1. Firstly, settings can be stored **within a repository**, which Git refers to as ***local***.
2. Secondly, settings can be stored within your operating system-level user account, which Git confusingly refers to as ***global***.
3. Finally, settings can be stored at the OS-level, which Git refers to as ***system***.

So, *local* settings are stored within a given Git repository, *global* settings with a given user account, and *system* settings within a given computer.

As a practical example, when Git needs to know what text editor it should use when asking you to enter a commit message it tries to find a value for the setting `core.editor`. It starts by checking if the folder your terminal is in is part of a Git repository, if it is, it checks that repository for a *local* key named `editor` in the `core` section. If it finds a value it uses it, if not, it checks for a user-account-wide or *global* value, again, if it finds one it uses it, if not, it checks at the OS or *system* level, and again, if it finds a value it uses it, otherwise it falls back on Git's default editor.

Under the hood Git saves all these settings in editable text files in INI format at specific OS-dependent paths, but you don't need to know that, because Git doesn't want you editing those files directly!

### Accessing & Editing Git's Settings with `git config`

The subcommand for reading and altering Git settings is `config`, so you can access the relevant `man` page with `man git-config`.

To see a list of all Git settings that apply in your current folder use:

```
git config --list
```

You can use the `--local`, `--global`, and `--system` flags to see only settings at that given level.

As an example, within my the copy of the PBS repository on my Mac I can see all the defined Git settings, regardless of the level they are coming from, with:

```
bart-imac2018:programming-by-stealth bart% git config --list         
credential.helper=osxkeychain
user.email=opensource@bartificer.net
user.name=Bart Busschots
core.bare=false
core.repositoryformatversion=0
core.filemode=true
core.ignorecase=true
core.precomposeunicode=true
core.logallrefupdates=true
remote.origin.url=https://github.com/bartificer/programming-by-stealth.git
remote.origin.fetch=+refs/heads/*:refs/remotes/origin/*
branch.master.remote=origin
branch.master.merge=refs/heads/master
branch.PBS93.remote=origin
branch.PBS93.merge=refs/heads/PBS93
branch.PBS94.remote=origin
branch.PBS94.merge=refs/heads/PBS94
branch.PBS95.remote=origin
branch.PBS95.merge=refs/heads/PBS95
bart-imac2018:programming-by-stealth bart%
```

I can see which settings are defined at each level by using the three level-related flags in turn:

```
bart-imac2018:programming-by-stealth bart% git config --list --local
core.bare=false
core.repositoryformatversion=0
core.filemode=true
core.ignorecase=true
core.precomposeunicode=true
core.logallrefupdates=true
remote.origin.url=https://github.com/bartificer/programming-by-stealth.git
remote.origin.fetch=+refs/heads/*:refs/remotes/origin/*
branch.master.remote=origin
branch.master.merge=refs/heads/master
branch.PBS93.remote=origin
branch.PBS93.merge=refs/heads/PBS93
branch.PBS94.remote=origin
branch.PBS94.merge=refs/heads/PBS94
branch.PBS95.remote=origin
branch.PBS95.merge=refs/heads/PBS95
bart-imac2018:programming-by-stealth bart% git config --list --global
user.email=opensource@bartificer.net
user.name=Bart Busschots
bart-imac2018:programming-by-stealth bart% git config --list --system
fatal: unable to read config file '/etc/gitconfig': No such file or directory
bart-imac2018:programming-by-stealth bart%
```

As you can see, most of my settings are repository-specific, but I do have two global settings which I use to identify myself. You can also see that my Mac doesn't have a system-wide settings file at all, so there are no system-wide settings in use.

You can see the current value for a given setting by passing that setting as the only argument:

```
bart-imac2018:programming-by-stealth bart% git config user.name
Bart Busschots
bart-imac2018:programming-by-stealth bart% 
```

You can change the value of a setting by passing a new value as a second argument. You should also use one of the level flags to tell Git where it should save the setting. To change my name for just the PBS repository, but not globally I would use:

```
git config --local user.name 'The Bartificer'
```

I can now see that within the PBS repository the local name applies, but within other folders my name remains `Bart Busschots`:

```
bart-imac2018:programming-by-stealth bart% git config user.name                
The Bartificer
bart-imac2018:programming-by-stealth bart% cd ~
bart-imac2018:~ bart% git config user.name
Bart Busschots
bart-imac2018:~ bart% cd -
~/Documents/Temp/From GitHub/programming-by-stealth
bart-imac2018:programming-by-stealth bart%
```

I can also ask Git to show me the value at specific levels by combining the `--get` flag with one of the level flags:

```
bart-imac2018:programming-by-stealth bart% git config --get --local user.name
The Bartificer
bart-imac2018:programming-by-stealth bart% git config --get --global user.name
Bart Busschots
bart-imac2018:programming-by-stealth bart%
```

I can also remove a value at a specific level with the `--unset` flag. So, to un-do my change and put everything back the way it was I can use:

```
git config --unset --local user.name
```

Finally, if you need to edit multiple settings at once you can open the config file for the relevant level in Git's default editor for your system with the `--edit` flag in conjunction with one of the level flags, e.g.:

```
git config --global --edit
```

In my case that opens VI, and the content I see is:

```
[user]
        email = opensource@bartificer.net
        name = Bart Busschots
```

You can see that like old Windows INI files, sections are defined between square brackets, and key-value pairs are listed on per line with the key and value separated by an `=` symbol, so, the above config file defines values for two keys, `user.email`, and `user.name`.

## Set Your Identity Globally

Before you start using Git you should set your name and email address globally using the `git config --global` command, e.g.:

```
git config --global user.name 'Bart Busschots'
git config --global user.email opensource@bartificer.net
```

## See the World from Git's POV with `git status`

To see where you are from a Git-point-of-view use the `git status` command. Since we haven't created a repository yet, all this command will tell us now is that we're not in a repository:

```
bart-imac2018:~ bart% git status
fatal: not a git repository (or any of the parent directories): .git
bart-imac2018:~ bart% 
```

## Creating A Git Repository with `git init`

Now that we've set our identity we are ready to create our first repository.

You can turn any folder into a Git repository by running the command `git init` from within the folder. You don't actually need to change into a folder to turn it into a repository, you can also pass the path to the folder as the first argument to `git init`.

Create an empty folder named `pbs103a`, change into that folder, then run `git init`, e.g.:

```
bart-imac2018:programming-by-stealth bart% cd ~/Documents/Temp 
bart-imac2018:Temp bart% mkdir pbs103a
bart-imac2018:Temp bart% cd pbs103a
bart-imac2018:pbs103a bart% git init
Initialized empty Git repository in /Users/bart/Documents/Temp/pbs103a/.git/
bart-imac2018:pbs103a bart%
```

You should see similar output, though you probably chose a different location for your folder than I did 🙂

Congratulations, you've just created your first Git repository!

As things stand, you have a completely empty repository with no commits in its database and no files in its working directory. We can see what this looks like with `git status`:

```
bart-imac2018:pbs103a bart% git status
On branch master

No commits yet

nothing to commit (create/copy files and use "git add" to track)
bart-imac2018:pbs103a bart%
```

This output tells you that you are currently on the default branch for your version of Git, `master` in my case, but if you have a newer version of `git` your default branch might be called `main`. You can also see that there are no commits in the database, and that the working director is empty because there is *'nothing to commit'*.

If you have an older version of Git and would like to use `main` instead of `master`, this is the ideal time to change the branch because until you add at least one commit to it, the branch doesn't really exist yet. You can change `master` to `main` with the command:

```
git checkout -b main
```

E.g.:

```
bart-imac2018:pbs103a bart% git checkout -b main     
Switched to a new branch 'main'
bart-imac2018:pbs103a bart% git status
On branch main

No commits yet

nothing to commit (create/copy files and use "git add" to track)
bart-imac2018:pbs103a bart% 
```

Notice that I am now on the branch `main`, and still have no commits and nothing to commit.

## Creating Our First File

TO DO

## Staging Our First File 

TO DO

## Committing Our First Version

TO DO