# PBS 124 of X — Chezmoi on Multiple Machines

At this stage in our [Chezmoi](https://www.chezmoi.io/) journey we've learned how to manage and version our *dot files*. We've learned that Chezmoi stores its version history in Git, and hence, that we can use a remote Git repository as a backup of our dot files.

We made a start on exploring the power to templating within Chezmoi — we learned how to define data, and how include that data in templates using the text/template syntax from the Go language. Specifically, we learned how to use the dot notation to include single values, and the `range` action to iterate over arrays and objects.

To keep things simple, I avoided using text/template jargon in the previous instalment, but we need to remedy that before we can move on to explore three powerful text/template features we'll need to master before we can start to use Chezmoi across multiple machines effectively.

Specifically, we'll be looking at:

1. comment actions
2. conditional actions
3. arguments & functions
4. variables
5. pipelines

TO UPDATE

## Matching Podcast Episode

TO DO

## Chezmoi Templates Without the Training Wheels

First things first, in text/template it's all about *actions* — that's the correct jargon for the thing that goes inside the pairs of curly braces.

So far we've seen two actions, one specific type of *pipeline* for outputting single values (the dot notation), and the `range` action.

## Comment Actions

Before we get into the more complex stuff, let's start nice and simple — you can add comments into a templates, and you can even combine the comment action with the white-space trim syntax:

```
{{/* This is a comment with no white-space trimming */}}
{{- /* This is a comment with preceding white-space trimmed */ }}
```

This is a lot more useful than it might at first appear, because it lets you include comments in places you usually can't, like JSON files.

## Conditional Actions

The next important action type the conditional. There are four actions that can be combined to address various scenarios — `{{ if CONDITION }}`, `{{ else if CONDITION }}`, `{{ else }}`, and `{{ end }}`.

Note that the examples below make use of the `eq` function. We'll be looking at functions in more detail later, but for now, it's sufficient to know that `eq` evaluates to true if the two values following it are equal to each other.

The simplest scenario is optional content:

```
{{ if (eq .chezmoi.os "darwin") }}
This text will only be included on Macs (Darwin is Apple's port of BSD that powers macOS).
{{ end }}
```

The next simplest scenario is two alternative pieces of content:

```
{{ if (eq .chezmoi.os "darwin") }}
This text will only be included on Macs.
{{ else }}
This text will be included everywhere but Macs.
{{ end }}
```

And finally, we can have multiple possible alternative pieces of content:

```
{{ if (eq .chezmoi.os "darwin") }}
This text will only be included on Macs.
{{ else if (eq .chezmoi.os "linux") }}
This text will only be included on Linux machines.
{{ else }}
This text will only be included on machines that are neither Macs nor running Linux.
{{ end }}
```

## Functions & Arguments

The definition of *argument* in the text/template jargon is a little odd — it basically means *a value*, and arguments can be one of:

1. A literal value — a string like `"boogers"`, a number like `42` or `3.14`, or a boolean (`true` or `false`).
2. A variable name (more on those later). You can recognise variables names because they must start with the `$` symbol.
3. A data field. You can recognise these because they start with a dot (`.`) character.

Functions are named actions that take zero or more arguments, and produce one output.

Chezmoi not only provides access to the standard functions provided by text/template, but augments them with the [spring](http://masterminds.github.io/sprig/) collection of templating utility functions.

Functions are called by using their name, without a prefix, followed by zero or more space-delimited arguments. When you come from C-style languages like JavaScript this is a little strange, but the way to think about it is that the JS code `someFunction(anArg, anotherArg)` becomes `{{ someFunction anArg anotherArg }}` in a template.

The standard functions provide both comparison functions and boolean functions.

### Comparison Functions

We've already see the most commonly used of these functions in our previous examples — the `eq` function. This function expects two or more arguments, and returns true of all the arguments have the same value, and false otherwise. Here's the full list of comparison functions:

| Function | Description |
| :--- | :--- |
| `eq` | **is Equal**, equivalent to `==` in JavaScript. |
| `ne` | **is Not Equal**, equivalent to `!=` in JavaScript. |
| `lt`| **is Less Than**, equivalent to `<` in JavaScript. |
| `le`| **is Less Than or Equal**, equivalent to `<=` in JavaScript. |
| `gt`| **is Greater Than**, equivalent to `>` in JavaScript. |
| `ge`| **is Greater Than or Equal**, equivalent to `>=` in JavaScript. |

### Boolean Functions

Beyond facilitating making comparisons, the default functions also implement basic boolean logic:

| Function | Description |
| :--- | :--- |
| `not` | Inverts its argument, equivalent to `!` in JavaScript. |
| `and` | A boolean **and**, equivalent to `&&` in JavaScript. |
| `or` | A boolean **or**, equivalent to `||` in JavaScript. |

### Nested Function Calls and Complex Logic

This is a good opportunity to illustrate text/template's support for nesting function calls within the arguments to function calls. Without this ability, the boolean functions would be quite useless!

The key to nesting is wrapping the nested function calls in brackets.

As an example, we can nest two calls to the `eq` function within a call to the `and` function within an `if` action like so:

```
{{ if (and (eq .chezmoi.os "darwin") (eq .chezmoi.version.builtBy "HomeBrew")) }}
You're one of the smart Mac users, you use homebrew 🙂
{{ end }}
```

Notice the pre-fix-style notation — this is alien to most of a younger generation, but those from an older generation may recognise it as *Polish notation*, and those who loved HP calculators may find it an annoying mirror-image of their preferred *reverse polish notation*.

### Defining Default Values

From a dot-file POV the most useful of the sprig functions is probably `default`. This allows you to specify a default value when a data field or variable you include has no value. The `default` function expects two arguments, the default value, and a possible non-default value that will be tested for emptiness. If the second argument is empty (an object with no keys, an array with no elements, an empty string, or the number zero), the first argument will be returned, otherwise, the second argument will be returned.

As a practical example, I like to export an environment variable named `CURRENT_WORK_DIR` that I use in various shell scripts and aliases. For various reasons I need to use different paths on different machines, so I need to define the value I want in the `data` section of my Chezmoi config file, but on computers where I don't define it, I need it to have a sane default, I can do that with:

```
export CURRENT_WORK_DIR={{ default "~/Documents" .currentWorkDir }}
```

## Variables

Variables can be defined and re-assigned pretty much anywhere an argument can be used. Like in JavaScript, variables need to be defined before they can be used, but unlike in JavaScript, the syntax is different between declaring a variable with an initial value, and assigning a new value to an existing variable.

To assign an initial value to a new variable the syntax is `$variableName := 'some value'`, while the syntax to assign a new value to an existing variable is `$variableName = 'some new value'`.

We've actually already seen this syntax in use when we used the `range` action to iterate over an object in the previous instalment:

```
LEFT OFF HERE!!!
```

## Pipelines

TO EXPAND

Pipelines are made up of one or more steps separate from each other with the pipe symbol (`|`), with the output from one step feeding into the next. In the previous instalment, all our pipelines consisted of a single part.

## Final Thoughts

TO DO