# PBS 107 of X — Time Travel with Git

TO DO

## Matching Podcast Episode

TO DO

## Instalment Resources

* The instalment ZIP file — [pbs107.zip](https://github.com/bartificer/programming-by-stealth/raw/master/instalmentZips/pbs107.zip).

## Playing Along

If you're like to play along with the examples you'll need to download this instalment's ZIP file and unzip it. Open a terminal and change into the folder you extracted the ZIP into. You'll find a file in there named `pbs107a.bundle`, this is a bundled version of the repository we created in the previous instalment, with an additional commit added to update the references to the instalment number from 106 to 107.

Like we did in the previous two instalments, we need to make a new repository and import all the commits from the bundle. We'll name our new repository `pbs107a`. To create this new repo we'll take the following steps:

1. create a folder named `pbs107a`
2. change into that folder
3. initialise it as a Git repo
4. if needed, change the default branch from `master` to `main`
5. import all the commits from the bundle into our new repository

The commands to do all this are

```
mkdir pbs106a
cd pbs107a
git init
[ `git symbolic-ref --short HEAD` = 'master' ] && git checkout -b main
git pull ../pbs107a.bundle
```

## A Correction: What `--` Really Means

In the previous instalment, as originally written, and as discussed in the matching podcast episode, we described using `git checkout` to retrieve specific files from a previous commit and bring them into the working copy.

We correctly stated that the command takes the form (where `HASH` is a commit hash, and `FILE_PATH(S)` the path to one or more files to retrieve):

```
git checkout HASH -- FILE_PATH(S)
```

The command was correct, but the explantation for the `--` flag was not. The notes in the previous instalment have been updated to correct the explanation, but a quick summary is as follows:

1. When ever at least one file path is passed to `git checkout` it switches from its default *'go to ...'* mode to it's '*fetch these*' mode — i.e. the current branch does not change.
2. In any `git` command, the flag `--` means *'nothing from here on is a flag to `git`, even if it looks like one'*.

The reason you should use the flag with `git checkout` is that file names can clash with `git` flags.

## Git Branching

Before we move on to the practicalities of creating a branch, let's take a moment to remind ourselves of the structure of a Git repository.

The atom of a Git history is the commit — a complete snapshot of the current state of your creative project at a specific time. These commits are connected together by a simple relationship, with the exception of the initial commit, **each commit has one parent commit**.

Your first commit, or *initial commit* on Git parlance is an orphan, but every other commit has a link back to exactly one commit the came before it in time, which we refer to as its *parent commit*. A mathematician can instantly recognise this as a graph (in the graph theory sense) — a series of connected items.

To visualise a Git repo you need to imagine the initial commit as your starting point, say on the left, and then time moves forward from left to right. Each future commit will be to the right of the initial commit, and there will be a line connecting it to its parent commit, which will always be to its left (back in time).

Up until this point our example repositories have all looked like straight lines from left to right, with the initial commit in the left, the `HEAD` of the `main` branch on the right, with all our other commits chaining those two ends together. In this situation not only does every commit after the initial commit have one parent, but every commit apart from the most recent commit is the parent of exactly one other commit. The first of those must always remain true, but the second is only true because we've been keeping things artificially simple!

Arbitrarily many commit can share the same parent commit, so if you graph that out, you'll see the lines connecting the commits split each time one parent has more than one child.

In this structure, what is a branch? A branch is simply a line of commits that starts at a current *'newest'* commit, known as the *head* of the branch, and connects back through a line of parent commits to the initial commit. Every commit in your repository can be thought of as the *head* of a branch since every commit has a line of ancestry connecting it to the initial commit. While that's true in theory, we don't generally think that way, and instead choose to name a handful of branches, and to do so for a reason.

Ultimately, inside the Git database, **a branch is nothing more than a named reference to the commit that is to be considered the head of the branch**. In effect you're telling Git to *"consider this commit to be the head of a branch with this name"*. When we say we have *checked out* a branch, what we mean is that the changes in the working copy will be calculated based on that branch's head commit, and most importantly, **when we create a new commit, the parent of the new commit will be the current head of the checked out branch, and the branch will be updated to consider the new commit to be its new head**.

## Branching Strategies

Branching is where Git goes from a science to an art! You can create as many branches as you like, and name them anything you want, but if you're not careful, all you'll do is make things more confusing and your creative project harder to manage.

To save your sanity you need to **create branches for specific purposes**, and you need to **give them meaningful names**.

Developing a good branching strategy is important when you're working alone, but it's critical when you move on to use Git to facilitate group work. Every member of a group collaborating on a project with Git needs to understand and adhere to an agreed-upon branching strategy!

The only way to get good at choosing branching strategies is to experiment. Do what seems sensible, try it for a while, and figure out what works well, and what doesn't. Tweak, try again, tweak, try again …

To get good at branching you need to make lots and lots of different mistakes. As long as you're making new mistakes you're doing it right — it's when you find yourself repeating the same mistakes over and over again that you need to worry 🙂

The question is not whether or not you'll fail, but wether or not you'll succeed at failing well!

### Common Building Blocks

Because every project is different, and because every group of developers is different, no two branching strategies are likely to be identical. That doesn't mean there aren't lots of common concepts that are shared widely. Quite the contrary, the vast majority of branching strategies are simply a mix of a few common concepts. But, even more fundamental than shared concepts is a shared over-arching goal — clarity.

I would argue very strongly that the single more important feature of a successful branching strategy is clarity about which commits contain **functioning code**, and which contain non-functioning code. 

When a stranger looks at your repository they should be able to:

1. Look at the repository as a whole and know which branch or branches can be checked out to get the most recent working code.
2. Look at specific commits and know whether or not they contain working code.

If I come to your repo and I can't tell what I can safely check out to experiment with your tool, your strategy has failed!

When you look at lots and lots or repos, you'll discover that the goal of clarity is achieved by combining just a small handful of recurring strategies.

The strategies that most catch my eye are:

1. **Main + Dev** — this two-branch strategy is about as simple as it can get. Only commits containing working code are allowed on the main branch. All development work is done on a parallel development branch, and when ever the code is in a working state it gets merged into the main brach. This is really simple, but it only works if you're working alone and have the discipline to work only ever work on one new feature at a time!
2. **Feature Branches** — this is a slightly more complex version of the **main + dev** strategy. Main remains a place where only working commits are allowed, but instead of all development taking place on a single dev branch, there are separate dev branches for each feature being worked on.
3. **Release Branches** — this strategy is only needed for major projects where there are multiple stable versions of the code that are being developed in parallel. Instead of a single main branch that contains all the working commits, you have multiple parallel branches that contain only working code, each providing a different version of the app. For example, if you develop a Mac app you may have a version 1.* branch that works on versions of macOS back as far as *el Capitan* but doesn't have any of the cool new features enabled by newer OSes, and a version 2.* branch that requires macOS *Big Sur* or newer and supports home screen widgets.

Notice that these strategies are not mutually exclusive. If you have release branches you might choose to have just a single dev branch for each of the legacy release branches, and to use feature branches on the most recent release branch.

You should also develop naming schemes so you can recognise branches for what they are.

In this series we're going to keep things simple and look at just the first two of those strategies, starting with a simple main+dev approach before moving on to feature branches.

## Creating a Branch

TO DO

## Final Thoughts

TO DO