## PBS 161 of X — jq: TO DO

TO DO

## Matching Podcast Episode

TO DO

## Installment Resources

* The instalment ZIP file — [pbs161.zip](https://github.com/bartificer/programming-by-stealth/raw/master/instalmentZips/pbs161.zip) TO CREATE

## PBS 160 Challenge Solutions

TO DO

## Mathematical Operators & Functions

Let's start nice and simple, the jq language supports the usual suspects in terms of mathematical operators:

| Operator | Description        | Example                      |
| -------- | ------------------ | ---------------------------- |
| `+`      | Addition           | `jq -n '1 + 1'` produces `2` |
| `-`      | Subtraction        | `jq -n '3 - 1'` produces `2` |
| `*`      | Multiplication     | `jq -n '2 * 1'` produces `2` |
| `/`      | Division           | `jq -n '4 / 2'` produces `2` |
| `%`      | Modulo (remainder) | `jq -n '5 % 3'` produces `2` |

Note the use of the `-n` flag in the examples to tell the `jq` command not to expect any input to process.

Something to notice is that the jq language does not support the increment and decrement operators `++` and `--`.

As well as these operators, the jq language also provides built in functions for performing arithemtic.

To make the examples shorter to write and easier to interpret we'll use a pair of JSON files from the instalment ZIP in our examples. First, we'll use `numbers.json` which contains a single top-level array of numbers:

```json
[
	-42,
	0,
	3.1415,
	11
]
```

And we'll also use `menu.json` which contains a top-level array of dictionaries, each contianing keys that are numeric:

```json
[
	{
		"name": "hotdogs",
		"price": 5.99,
		"stock": 143
	},
	{
		"name": "pancakes",
		"price": 3.10,
		"stock": 43
	},
	{
		"name": "waffles",
		"price": 7.50,
		"stock": 14
	}
]
```

Note that some of these functions can tolerate having non-numbers sent to them, but many will throw errors for at least some non-numeric data types, so to be safe, only send numbers through these functions. Another thing to watch out for is that even when non-numeric values don't cause errors they can produce unexpected results, e.g. the absolute value of a string represatation of a negative number is the same string, un-changed — `jq -n '"-9.999" | abs'` outputs `"-9.999"`.

| jq Function         | Description                                                  | Example                                                      |
| ------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
| `abs`               | Outputs the absolute value of the input.                     | `jq '.[] | abs' numbers.json` outputs`42`, `0`, `3.1415` & `11` |
| `floor`             | Rounds input decimal numbers down to the integer part.       | `jq -n '3.1415 | floor'` outputs `3`, and `jq -n '9.999 | floor'` outputs `9` |
| `sqrt`              | Outputs the square root of the input.                        |                                                              |
| `min`               | Outputs the minimum value from an input array of numbers.    | `jq '. | min' numbers.json` outputs `-42`                    |
| `max`               | Outputs the maximum value from an input array of numbers.    | `jq '. | max' numbers.json` outputs `11`                     |
| `min_by(.KEY_PATH)` | Outputs the dictionary in an input array of dictionaries that has the minimum value for a given key. | `jq -c '. | min_by(.stock)' menu.json` outputs `{"name":"waffles","price":7.50,"stock":14}` |
| `max_by(.KEY_PATH)` | Outputs the dictionary in an inpuit array of dictionaries that has the maximum value for a given key. | `jq -c '. | max_by(.price)' menu.json` outputs `{"name":"waffles","price":7.50,"stock":14}` |

Those are the arithmetic functions provided by the jq language itself, but the `jq` command has a mathematical trick up its sleeve! All the standard 1, 2 & 3 argument C arithmetic functiuons from C's standard math library can be used in jq. 

For reason's I can't quite fathom the way in which one-argument C functions and two or three argument C functions get mapped to jq are not consistent. For one-argument C functions the input to the jq function gets passed as the C function's argument. But, for two and three argument C functions all arguments need to be specified in jq.

The exact functions available will depend on the version of the C libaries installed on the computer, but some widely available useful ones of note are:

| C Maths Function | Description                                                  | Example                                                      |
| ---------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
| `ceil`           | Round an input decimal number up to the nearest integer. An obvious companion for jq's built-in `floor` and C's `round` functions. | `jq -n '3.1415 | ceil'` outputs `4`, and `jq -n '9.999 | ceil'` outputs `10` |
| `round`          | Round an input decimal number up or down to the nearest integer. An obvious companion for jq's built-in `floor` and C's `ceil` functions. | `jq -n '3.1415 | round'` outputs `3`, and `jq -n '9.999 | round'` outputs `10` |
| `pow`            | Raise an input number to the power passed as the first argument. | `jq -n '2 | pow(.; 3)'` outputs `8`                          |

## Assignment Operators

In most programming languages, assignment operators are used to set the values of variables, but that's now the case in jq, instead, **assignment operators are used to set values within _the item currently being processed_**, i.e. for controling values within `.`.

The left-hand-side of an assignment operator has to be a path within `.`, e.g. `.year` to alter the `year` key of the dictionary currently being processed. The right-hand-side must be an expression that produces the value to be assigned.

### Plain -v- Update Assignments

A very important subtly is the different between the meaning of `.` on the right-hand-side of an expression depending on whether you use the *plain* assignment operator `=`, or one of the many *update-assignment* operators (`|=`, `+=`, `*=`, etc.).

With plain assignment, the value for `.` is the **same** on both sides of the operator, it is *the item currently being processed*. When using the update-assignments operators, the value for `.` is _the value for **the item currently being assigned into**_.

To see the different, consider the following simple dictionary:

```json
{
  "breakfast": "pancakes",
  "lunch": "BLT",
  "dinner": "pizza"
}
```

If that dictionary were in input to a plain-assignment, then the value of `.` on **both** the left and right hand sides would be that full dictionary, so you could set the value for `dinner` to become the same as the value for `breakfast` with the assignment `.dinner = .breakfast`.  The result of this assignment would be to change the input dictionary to become:

```json
{
  "breakfast": "pancakes",
  "lunch": "BLT",
  "dinner": "pancakes"
}
```

We can see this for ourselves with the following `jq` command:

```sh
# -n tell jq not to expect any input
jq -n '{breakfast: "pancakes", lunch: "BLT", dinner: "pizza"} | .dinner = .breakfast'
```

If we send the same dictionary to the update-assignment `.dinner |= .breakfast`, we get an error, why? Because with an update assignment, the value of `.` is the currenty value of `.dinner`, because update assignments are designed for use when you want the new value to depend on the old value.

So, if we wanted to append to our dinner we could do it the long way with, `.dinner = "\(.dinner) and nachos"`, or, we could avoid the need to specifiy the path twice and simple use `.dinner = "\(.) and nachos"`, as demonstrated by this `jq` command:

```sh
jq -n '{breakfast: "pancakes", lunch: "BLT", dinner: "pizza"} | .dinner |= "\(.) and nachos"'
```

To keep the two types of assignment clear in my head, the question I ask myself is *"do I want to set a new value, or update the existing value"* — if I want to update the existing value, I use an update assignment, and `.` becomes *the current value*, which seems like a sensible decision by the jq developers given the problem to be solved.

### Always *'by Value'*, Never *'by Reference'*

In many modern programming languages, including JavaScript, complex data types are *passed by reference* while simple values are *passed by value*.

This fact trips up many novice programmers, because it can cause *spooky action at a distance*. For example, consider the following JavaScript code, what will get logged to the console?

```javascript
let a = [1, 2, 3];
let b = a;
a.push(4);
console.log(b);
```

If JavaScript assigned `b` to be a **copy** of `a` then `b` would have `a`'s original value, `[1, 2, 3]`, but that's not what happens, because in Javascript `a` does not contain the array, it contains a **reference** to the array, so when `b` gets assigned to be the same as `a` it becomes a **reference to the same array**, so the log statement will output `[1, 2, 3 , 4]` (as you can see for yourself using your browser's JavaScript console)!

But, unlike JavaScript, **jq always coppies by value, never by reference**.

So, in jq, when you assign the value of `.a` to `.b`, then update `.b`, there is no spooky action at a distance, and demonstrated by the following simple jq script (`pbs161a.jq` in the instalment ZIP):

```jq
# Demonstrate that jq uses pass by value rather than pass by reference
# Input:    NONE
# Output:   A dictionary with keys a & b

# start with a dictrionary with one key, a, that is an array
{
    a: [1, 2, 3]
}

# update the dictionary with a new key b that is a copy of a
| .b = .a

# update a by adding a 4th value to the array
| .a[3] = 4
```

We can run this script with the command:

```sh
# -f tells jq to read its filter from a file
# -c tells jq we want compact output
jq -n -f pbs161a.jq -c
```

When we do, it produces the following output (re-flowed to save space):

```json
{"a":[1,2,3,4],"b":[1,2,3]}
```

This shows that unlike in JavaScript, in jq, modifying `.a` after setting `.b` to be equal to `.a` does not change `.b`.

### The Update Assignment Operators

As we've already seen, the generic update assignment operator is `|=`, but jq provides a suite of addtional update opperators that are in effect simply shortcuts to make your filters easier to write and read. 

| Operator | Description                               | Shortcut for |
| -------- | ----------------------------------------- | ------------ |
| `+=`     | Increment by …                            | `|= . +`     |
| `-=`     | Decrement by …                             | `|= . -`     |
| `*=`     | Multiply by …            | `|= . *`     |
| `/=`     | Divide by …               | `|= . /`     |
| `%=`     | Modulous … | `|= . %`     |
| `//=`    | Alternate assignment           | `|= . //`    |

While `jq` does not have increment or decrement operators (`++` & `--`in most languages), we can at least use `+= 1` and `-= 1` instead, as shown in this example:

```sh
jq -nc '{a: 2, b: 2} | .a += 1 | .b -= 1' # outputs {"a":3,"b":1}
```

Finally, the alternate assignment operator (`//=`) can be useful for assigning default values for dictionary keys that may or may not  be present. For example, our example Nobel Prizes data set (`NobelPrizes.json` in the instalment ZIP) does not have a `laureats` array in the dictionaries representing prizes that were not awarded — we could add an empty `laureats` array into every un-awarded prize with the command:

```sh
jq '[.prizes[] | .laureates //= []]' NobelPrizes.json
```

## Transforming Strings

As well as allowing us to transform numbers, the jq languages provides many mechanisms for transforming strings.

### 'Adding', 'Multipling' & 'dividing' Strings (Operator Overloading)

The jq language has, to use programming jargon *overloaded* some of it's operators, including the addition (`+`) operator. Overloaded operators do different things when presented with different types of data to operate on. Many programming languages use overloading, and while we may not have called it out by name when we expored JavaScript, we did see operator overloading when we used `+` both for arithmetic addition, and for string concatenation.

Note that the jq language's support of operator overloading is basic compared to what we saw with JavaScript. JavaScript's operator overloading can handle different data types on each side of the operator, and them automatically *casts* (i.e. converts) one of the two to match the other before applying the appropriate action. This requires complex rules for determining what to do for every possible combination of types. In jq things are much simpler — with just a few specific exceptions, **the types on each side of the overloaded operators must match**! 

Bringing this back to strings, like in JavaScript, jq's `+` operator is overloaded for both arithmentic addition and string concatenation  i.e. when both inputs are numbers they get added, and when both are strings they get concatenated:

```sh
# two numbers - arithmetic addition (as above)
jq -n '22 + 20' # oputputs 42

# two strings - concatenation
jq -n '"a string" + " another string"' # oputputs "a string another string"

# mismatched types
jq -n '"a string" + 42' # throws an error
```

As we'll learn later, the `+` operator is even more overloaded than this, it can also handle arrays and dictionaries!

The multiplication operator (`*`) is also overloaded, and it is one of those where a specific mis-match of types is explicitly supported — you can multiply a string by a number to concatenate it with itself that many times, in other words, to repeat it that many times:

```sh
jq -n '"Ho" * 3' # outputs "HoHoHo"
```

Finally, the division operator `/` has been overloaded to work with two strings — when a string is divided by another string, the string to the left is split on the string to the right, and an array is returned. In other words, **string division with `/` is an shortcut for the `split` function**.

```sh
jq -nc '"10:20:30" / ":"' # outputs ["10","20","30"]
```

### Built-in String Functions

The jq language provides a selection of built-in functions for manipulating strings, some of the more useful ones are listed below:

| Function         | Description                                                  | Example                                                      |
| ---------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
| `ascii_downcase` | Convert an input string to lower case.                       | `jq -n '"Somethin" | ascii_downcase'` outputs `"something"`  |
| `ascii_upcase`   | Convert an input string to upper case.                       | `jq -n '"Something" |ascii_upcase'` outputs `"SOMETHING"`    |
| `ltrimstr`       | Remove a given prefix from an input string, or return the string un-changed if the prefix is not present. | `jq -n '"DEBUG: something" | ltrimstr("DEBUG: ")'` outputs `"something"` |
| `rtrimstr`       | Remove a given postfix from an input string, or return the string un-changed if the postfix is not present. | `jq -n '"something (DEBUG)" | rtrimstr(" (DEBUG)")'` outputs `"something"` |
| `sub`            | Perform string substitution on an input string to produce the output string. A regular expression should be passed as the first argument, a replacement as the second, and optionally regular expression flags as a third. | `jq -n '"2023-11-12: Something" | sub("[0-9]{4}-[0-9]{2}-[0-9]{2}: "; "")'` outputs `"Something"`, i.e. replaces a leading timestamp with an empty string. |

## Optional Challenge

write a jq script that will take as its input the Nobel Prizes data set (`NobelPrizes.json`), and sanitises it, using the various assignment operators, to achieve the following changes:

1. Add a boolean key named `awarded` to every prize dictionary to indicate whether or not it was awarded.
2. Ensure all prize dictionaries have a `laureates` array, it should be empty for prizes that were not awarded.
3. Add a boolean key named `organisation` to each laureate dictionary, indicating whether or not the laureate is an organisation rather than a person.
4. Add a key named `displayName` to each laureate dictionary, for people it should contain the first name and last names, for organisations, just the organisation name.

## Final Thoughts

TO DO

## EPISODE BREAK — Altering Arrays

Now that we've seen how to alter strings, let's take a look at way of transforming arrays.

### Re-Ordering Arrays (`sort` & `reverse`)

Let's start with the simplest type of array transformation — re-orderings.

The simplest re-ordering is a straight forward reversing, and jq provides just that with the `reverse` function:

```sh
jq -nc '[1, 2, 3] | reverse' # outputs [3,2,1]
```

Then of course we have array sorting.

When you have an array with simple values the built-in `sort` function will generally do what you want.

The function requires an array as input, and it will first group elements by type, starting with any `null` elements, then any booleans, then numbers, then strings, then arrays, and finally dictionaries. Within each grouping it will then perform the most sensible sorting, `false` before `true` for Booleans, numeric sorting for numbers, and alphabetic (lexical) sorting for strings. (Note that the rules for sorting arrays and dictionaries exist, but are out of the scope of this series).

Let's see the `sort` function in action:

```sh
# numbers
jq -nc '[1, 4, 3] | sort' # outputs [1,3,4]

# strings
jq -nc '["popcorn", "waffles",  "pancakes"] | sort' 
# outputs ["pancakes","popcorn","waffles"]

# mixed types
jq -nc '[42, true, 11, "waffles", false,  "pancakes"] | sort'
# outputs [false,true,11,42,"pancakes","waffles"]
```

When dealing with arrays containing more complicated elements like other arrays or dictionaries, you probably want to specify your own rule for sorting, you can do this with th `sort_by` function. It takes as an argument a filter, and that filter will be applied to each array element, and the elements will be sorted based on the results of applying the filter. Usually the filter is simply a dictionary key.

For example, we can re-order our menu (from the `menu.js` file in the instalment ZIP), with:

```sh
jq 'sort_by(.price)' menu.json
```

This outputs:

```json
[
  {
    "name": "pancakes",
    "price": 3.10,
    "stock": 43
  },
  {
    "name": "hotdogs",
    "price": 5.99,
    "stock": 143
  },
  {
    "name": "waffles",
    "price": 7.50,
    "stock": 14
  }
]
```

As you can see, the array is now sorted by price.

### Adding and Removing Elements with the  `+` & `-` Operators

As mentioned earlier, the `+` operator has been overloaded to perform a useful action when both inputs are arrays — it merges them into a new bigger array:

```sh
# Note: -n for no input & -c for compact output
jq -nc '[1, 2] + [3, 4]' # outputs [1,2,3,4]
```

While the `-` operator is not overloaded for strings, it is overloaded for arrays, and can be used create a new array with elements removed. The array to the left of the `-` is treated as the original array, and the elements in the array to the right of the `-` are removed from the original array, if present, to create the output array.

```sh
jq -nc '[1, 2, 3, 4] - [4, 5]' # outputs [1,2,3]
```

### Array Deduplication

When you start adding arrays together it's easy to end up with duplucates that you may well not want. The jq language provides two useful functions for removing them.

Firstly, the simple `unique` function returns the input array sorted with any duplicated elements removed. The input must be an array. For exmaple:

```sh
jq -nc '[4, 1, 4, 3, 2] | unique' # outputs [1,2,3,4]
```

If you need a more complex definition of 'uniqueness' you can use the `unique_by` function to supply your own filter as an argument. The output array will only contain one element which the filter evaluates to a given value. If multiple elements evaluate to the same value, one will be kept, but there's no guarantee as to which one it will be. Also note that the elements in the output array will be sorted based on the result of the filter.

As a somewhat contrived example, we can make our menu (from `menu.json` above) unique by length of name. Before we do, let's compute the lengths see what results we expect, we can do that with:

```sh
jq '.[] | .name | length' menu.json
```

This shows that hotdogs and waffles have 7 letters, and pancakes 8. We would expect to always get pancakes in our answer, but only one of waffles or hotdogs when we make the menu unique by name. Let's try:

```sh
jq 'unique_by(.name | length)' menu.json
```

This gives us the output:

```json
[
  {
    "name": "hotdogs",
    "price": 5.99,
    "stock": 143
  },
  {
    "name": "pancakes",
    "price": 3.10,
    "stock": 43
  }
]
```

As expected, we get one item with a name of length 7, the one with a name of length 8, because the items are sorted on the result of the filter as well as deduplicated based on it.

### Flattening Nested Arrays

When assembling an array from multiple sources you may end up with an array of arrays when you actually wanted a single unified array. This is where the built-in `flatten` function comes in.

The `flatten` function takes an array as in input, and if it contains other arrays, it replaces them with their entries in the output array. The funtion applies this logic recursively, so you if your array contains arrays which contain arrays, it will still flatten them all out to a single array of all the values.

```sh
jq -nc '[1, [2, 3], [4, [5, 6]]] | flatten'
# outputs [1,2,3,4,5,6]
```

By default the flatten function will keep recursing down into all nested arrays, but you can pass an optional argument to limit how deep it goes. To see what this means, let's repeat our above example with limits of 2 and 1:

```sh
# limit to a depth of 2
# arrays in the input array, and arrays in arrays in the input array
jq -nc '[1, [2, 3], [4, [5, 6]]] | flatten(2)'
# outputs [1,2,3,4,5,6]

# limit to a depth of 1
# arrays in the input array only
jq -nc '[1, [2, 3], [4, [5, 6]]] | flatten(1)'
# outputs [1,2,3,4,[5,6]]
```

## Dictionary Manipulation

### Adding and Removing Keys

As mentioned earlier, the `+` operators is overloaded for handling dicrtionaries. When two dictionaries are added together, a new dictionary is created containing the keys and values from both. If both input dictionaries define a value for the same key, the value from the dictionary on the right of the `+` operator is used.

If the dictionaries contain dictionaries, a recursive merge can be done by using the `*` operator instead of the `+` operator.

You might imagine key could comehow be removed with an overloaded subtraction operator, but alas not, we need to use the built-in `del` function for that. This function requires a dictionary as the input, and a key path as an argument. For example, we could remove the stock key from each item in our menu (`menu.js` from the instalment ZIP) with:

```sh
jq '.[] | del(.stock)' menu.json
```

Which returns:

```json
{
  "name": "hotdogs",
  "price": 5.99
}
{
  "name": "pancakes",
  "price": 3.10
}
{
  "name": "waffles",
  "price": 7.50
}
```

Note we expoloded the array in this example, so we now have a list of separate output values instead of a single array. We can combin the `del` function with the `map` function to avoid exploding the array:

```sh
jq 'map(del(.stock))' menu.json
```

This returns a single array containing the updated dictionaries:

```json
[
  {
    "name": "hotdogs",
    "price": 5.99
  },
  {
    "name": "pancakes",
    "price": 3.10
  },
  {
    "name": "waffles",
    "price": 7.50
  }
]
```

# EPISODE BREAK — jq: In-Place Array & Dictionary Manipulation

At this stage in our jq journey we've met many operators and functions which can manipulate data, but each time we've applied a transformation to each element in an array we've done so by exploding it apart updating each piece, and then re-assembling it. We've never even considered applying the same transformation to every value in a dictionary, because based purely on what we've learned so far, we couldn't put the dictionary back together again!

What if you could edit the contents of arrays and dictionaries without ever needing to explode them? As you've probably guessed from the setup, you can! And, this entire instalment is dedicated to doing just that with two of jq's most powerful functions, `map` & `map_values`.

MAYBE — cover `reduce` too

## Altering Each Element in an Array with the `map` Function

In most programming languages, you need to loop over arrays to manipulate their contents, but in jq you don't need to do that — you can simply pipe an array to the `map` function and describe the desired transformation with a filter passed as the first argument.

Within a the filter passed as the first argument to `map`,  `.` represents *'the array element being processed'*, and the filter will be applied to each element in the array. The function then outputs the updated array.

In effect, `map` lets you **loop over an aray in a single function call**, and **process each element without exploding the array**.

For example, we can convert all the numbers in an array to their absolute values with:

```sh
# -n tells jq not to expect any input
# -c tells jq to render the output in a compact format
jq -nc '[1, -2, 3, -42] | map(. | abs)'
# outputs [1,2,3,42]
```

One of the most common uses of `map` is in conjunction with `select`, allowing you filter an array down to only the elements that meet a particular criteria without needing to explode and then re-assemble it.

As an example, let's filter the Nobel Prizes data set down to an array with just the physics prizes, with their order reversed so the older prize comes first, and the newest last. Here's how we would do that without using `map`:

```sh
jq '[.prizes[] | select(.category == "physics")] | reverse' NobelPrizes.json
```

Note the need to explode the prizes with `.prizes[]`, and then to re-assemble the array by wrapping the exposion and the `select` filters in square brackets ( `[` & `]`).

With `map`, we can simplify things:

```sh
jq '.prizes | map(select(.category == "physics")) | reverse' NobelPrizes.json
```

We now have a simple filter chain without the need for nesting part of it within square brackets, making it easier to read and to maintain.

Note that this technique works because the `select` function returns `empty` rather than `null` when called with a value that does not match the specified criteria, transforming un-matched entries into absolute nothingless, hence deleting them!

One final point to note — `map` will not give an error when the input is a dictionary, it will simply treat the values within the key-value pairs as array elements, and output an array of their processed results. At first glance this might seem useless, how often do you have a dictionary who's keys you don't need? But actually, it is occassionaly useful, imagine you have weekly sales data in dictionary indexed by day-of-the-week, like so (`weeklySales.json` in the instalment ZIP):

```json
{
  "mon": 2343,
  "tue": 4324,
  "wed": 4121,
  "thur": 8762,
  "fri": 11452,
  "sat": 32394,
  "sun": 0
}
```

To convert this to an array of numbers we can call `map` with a filter that passes the values through un-changed, i.e. simply `.`:

```sh
jq -c 'map(.)' weeklySales.json # outputs [2343,4324,4121,8762,11452,32394,0]
```

Notice that the values in the array are in the order the keys were added to the dictionary, not in any kind of sorted order.

## The `map_values` Function

In many ways the `map_values` function is very similar to the `map` function, but while `map` is primarily designed for processing arrays, `map_values` is primarily designed for processing dictionaries.

It's structure is the same — the input should be a dictionary, and its argument is a filter to be applied to each value in the dictionary to produce a new value in the output dictionary, and within the filter, `.` is the value currently being processed.

So, to double all the sales data in our weekly sales dictionary, we would run the command:

```sh
jq 'map_values(. * 2)' weeklySales.json
```

This produces the following dictionary:

```json
{
  "mon": 4686,
  "tue": 8648,
  "wed": 8242,
  "thur": 17524,
  "fri": 22904,
  "sat": 64788,
  "sun": 0
}
```

Similar to how `map` does not throw an error when passed a dictionary, `map_values` will not throw an error when you pass it an array, it will simply process the array, and return an updated array (not a dictionary).

## Beware the Subtle Difference between `map` & `map_values` 

With `map`, when a filter maps a single input values to multiple output values, they all appear in the output array, but `map_values` will only include the first generated value for each input.

As a somewhat contrived example to illustrate this difference, let's pass an array of arrays to both functions and see what happens when we use a filter that explodes these sub-arrays:

```sh
# use map to explode sub-arrays
jq -nc '[[1], [2, 2], [3, 3, 3]] | map(.[])' # outputs [1,2,2,3,3,3]

# try use map_values to explode sub-arrays
jq -nc '[[1], [2, 2], [3, 3, 3]] | map_values(.[])' # outputs [1,2,3]
```

## The `reduce` Function 

TO DO - MAYBE

# EPISODE BREAK — jq: Some Advanced Topics

## Traditional Loops with `foreach`, `while`, `until` & MAYBE `repeat`

## MAYBE — Recursive descent with `recurse`

Most sensible example is a directory tree, can generate with: https://www.npmjs.com/package/dir-to-json

## Variables & Loops with `as`

Potential example — prizes with and above average number of winners

## If-the-else

## Try-catch

