# PBS 114 of X — The Push & Pull of Git

Armed with our introduction to the concept of Git Remotes from [instalment 112], we created our first remote repository in [the previous instalment](pbs113), and used it to back up our work. We learned how to establish as relationship at the repository level, but not at the branch level. This made it much harder than it needs to be to keep our backup in sync.  To improve our workflow we need to learn how to make connections between local and remote branches.

In the previous instalment we implemented a simple scenario — a lone developer with one development computer, and a desire to back their work up to a NAS drive mounted on their computer's file system. Armed with our new-found ability to create connections between local and remote branches we' are now read'll be ready to expand our scenario to incorporate a second development computer, perhaps an imaginary laptop. What was our backup repository on the imagined NAS now becomes the authoritative or primary copy of the repo, and we get two working copies, one on our imagined desktop, and one on our imagined laptop. The NAS repo now takes on two roles — it remains a backup, but it now also acts as an intermediary between the laptop and desktop repos, allowing work to be distributed across both.

## Matching Podcast Episode

TO DO

## Instalment Resources

* The instalment ZIP file — [pbs114.zip](https://github.com/bartificer/programming-by-stealth/raw/master/instalmentZips/pbs114.zip).

## Playing Along

If you'd like to play along with the examples you'll need to download this instalment's ZIP file and unzip it. Open a terminal and change to the folder into which you extracted the ZIP . You'll find a bash script named `pbs114-init.sh` as well as a bundle file name `pbs114a.bundle`.

This script automates the steps bring us back to where we left off last time, one working repository now named `pbs114a-desktop`, and one pretend-NAS-repository now named `pbs114a-nas`. If you open the script in your favourite text editor you'll see that it does the following:

1. create a folder named `pbs114a-desktop`
2. change into that folder
3. initialise it as a Git repo
4. if needed, change the default branch from `master` to `main`
5. import all branches and tags from the bundle
6. change back to the zip folder
7. created a folder named `pbs114a-nas.git`
8. initialise `pbs114a-nas.git` as a bare Git repo
9. change into the `pbs114a-desktop` folder/repo
10. add `pbs114a-nas.git` as a remote named `origin`
11. fetch `origin` (the prentend-NAS repo)
11. push all branches to `origin`
12. push all tags to `origin`

One you have a terminal open in the folder the ZIP extracted to you're ready to run the script. We'll start by making sure the script is executable:

```
chmod 755 *.sh
```

Now we can execute it with:

```
./pbs114-init.sh
```

If you view the contents of the folder (in your file manager or on the Terminal with the `ls` command) you'll see that two new folders have been created named `pbs114a-desktop`, and `pbs114a-nas`, these are our repositories.

### A Little House-Keeping — Deleting an Obsolete Fetched Branch from a non-Existant Remote

When we imported *everything* from the bundle file, we actually imported a little more than we had intended to.

The bundle was created from the repository as it stood at the end of the previous instalment. At that time there was a remote named `backup` which had a branch named `main`, and we'd fetched that remote, so the repository contained a cache of that remote branch.

Remotes don't restore from bundles, and, our init script did not create a new remote named `backup`, instead, it created a remote named `origin`. We can see that our *desktop* repository has exactly one remote named `origin` by changing into that repository (`cd  pbs114a-desktop`) and listing all remotes (`git remote`):

```
bart-imac2018:pbs114 bart% cd pbs114a-desktop   
bart-imac2018:pbs114a-desktop bart% git remote
origin
bart-imac2018:pbs114a-desktop bart%
```

However, if we list all cached remote branches (with `git branch -r`) we find more than we were expecting:

```
bart-imac2018:pbs114a-desktop bart% git branch -r
  backup/main
  origin/main
bart-imac2018:pbs114a-desktop bart%
```

Since there is no remote named `backup` any  more, this cached remote branch is useless, and should be removed. We can do this by combining the `-d` for *delete* & `-r` for *remote* flags with the `git branch` command:

```
git branch -dr backup/main
```

Listing all cached remote branches now shows what we expect, just one remote branch, `origin/main`:

```
bart-imac2018:pbs114a-desktop bart% git branch -r             
  origin/main
bart-imac2018:pbs114a-desktop bart%
```

## Tracking Branches

To allow Git to push and pull without needing explicit branch names all the time we need to tell it which local branches match to which remote branches.

The commands to set up tracking relationships vary a little depending on your exact situation. There are three situations we'll cover:

1. Establishing a tracking relationship between a local and a remote branch that already exist.
2. Publishing a local branch that does not previously exist on a remote to that remote.
3. Creating a new local branch from a pre-existing remote branch. Put a pin in this scenario until later.

### Tracking Exiting Branches

The simplest scenario is where both the local and remote branches already exist, and you simply want to tell Git to have the local branch track the remote one. You do this with the `git branch` sub-command, and **you have to run the command with the desired local branch checked out**. The full version of the command is:

```
git branch --set-upstream-to=REMOTE/REMOTE_BRANCH
```

Where `REMOTE` is the name of a remote, and `REMOTE_BRANCH` the name of a branch that exists in the specified remote. Thankfully there is a shorter version of this command:

```
git branch -u REMOTE/REMOTE_BRANCH
```

Let's use this command to connect our local `main` branch to the `main` branch on our *SAN* repository which we have named `origin`. Before we start, we need to be sure we are on our local main branch with a quick `git status` (if you're not, check out `main` with `git checkout main`). We're now ready to create the link:

```
git branch -u origin/main
```

We can see all the tracking relationships that exist with a very verbose branch listing, i.e. with the `-vv` flag on the `git branch` command:

```
bart-imac2018:pbs114a-desktop bart% git branch -vv 
* main b029d25 [origin/main] chore: bumped instalment numbers
bart-imac2018:pbs114a-desktop bart% 
```

We only have one branch ATM, so this is not a very interesting list, but it is worth describing in detail. Firstly, it's one local branch per line, so if we had more local branches we'd have more lines. The `*` at the start of a line shows which local branch is currently checked out. The first real column shows the name of the local branch (`main` above), the second column the short hash of the current most recent commit on that branch, then, if there is a tracking relationship defined, the remote branch enclosed within square brackets, so `[origin/main]` above, and finally the most recent commit's commit message.

Also notice that the `git status` command now gives us information about the tracked remote branch, and our status relative to it:

```
bart-imac2018:pbs114a-desktop bart% git status 
On branch main
Your branch is up to date with 'origin/main'.

nothing to commit, working tree clean
bart-imac2018:pbs114a-desktop bart%
```

In this case, it's telling us we're up to date with the remote branch `origin/main`.

### Publishing a New Local Branch to a Remote

The next common scenario is creating a new branch locally and then publishing it to a remote. You could push the branch with `git push` and then track the branch with `git branch -u`, but because this is such a common thing to want to do, Git provides us with a convenient short-cut to push and track with one command — the `--set-upstream` flag for `git push `.

Before we go any further, let's create a new local branch that we can then push and track.

It turns out my history of *Hello Worlds* is incomplete — there should be an entry for PowerShell dated 2020, so let's do that.

We'll start by creating a local dev branch:

```
git checkout -b dev-powershell
```

You'll find an updated version of `index.html` in the folder `pbs114a-2` in the instalment ZIP. Replace `index.html` in your working tree (`pbs114a-desktop`) with this file.

As we can see, we now have some changes to commit:

```
bart-imac2018:pbs114a-desktop bart% git status
On branch dev-powershell
Changes not staged for commit:
  (use "git add <file>..." to update what will be committed)
  (use "git checkout -- <file>..." to discard changes in working directory)

	modified:   index.html

no changes added to commit (use "git add" and/or "git commit -a")
bart-imac2018:pbs114a-desktop bart% 
```

Let's commit them:

```
git commit -am 'feat: added PowerShell in 2020 to Hello World History'
```

We now have a local branch named `dev-powershell` with one commit that does not exist on our remote at all. We want to push it to the remote, and, track the new remote copy.

We could do that in two steps like so:

```
git push origin dev-powershell
git branch -u origin/dev-powershell
```

But, we can actually do it in with thanks to the `--set-upstream` flag for `git push`:

```
git push --set-upstream origin dev-powershell
```

In fact, we can make things even simpler, the `--set-upstream` flag has the much shorter alias `-u`, so the command we actually want to execute is simply:

```
git push -u origin dev-powershell
```

We can now see that we have two tracking branches with `git branch -vv`:

```
bart-imac2018:pbs114a-desktop bart% git branch -vv
* dev-powershell 9db968c [origin/dev-powershell] feat: added PowerShell in 2020 to Hello World History
  main           b029d25 [origin/main] chore: bumped instalment numbers
```

## Pushing with Tracking

It turns out there's a bug in my code — I copied and pasted the entry for PowerShell from the one for Node.js, and while I changed the code snippet, I forgot to update the URL to learn more. Let's correct that now!

You'll find an updated version of `index.html` in the folder `pbs114a-3` in the instalment ZIP. Replace `index.html` in your working tree (`pbs114a-desktop`) with this file.

Now let's commit our fix:

```
git commit -am 'Fix: corrected PowerShell URL'
```

At this point we have a commit on our local `dev-powershell` branch that doesn't exist on the remote `dev-powershell` branch. Because we've established a tracking relationship, `git status` will tell us this:

```
bart-imac2018:pbs114a-desktop bart% git status
On branch dev-powershell
Your branch is ahead of 'origin/dev-powershell' by 1 commit.
  (use "git push" to publish your local commits)

nothing to commit, working tree clean
bart-imac2018:pbs114a-desktop bart% 
```

As Git so kindly tells us, and because we have a tracking relationship, we can push our change to `origin` with the nice simple command:

```
git push
```

That's it, we've now pushed our changes to our *NAS repository* where they are safe.

At this stage our new feature is done, so it's ready to be merged into `main`, let's do that in our new remote-aware way. The process will be to:

1. Checkout `main`
2. Merge our local `dev-powershell` into `main`
3. Push the now updated `main` to `origin`

```
bart-imac2018:pbs114a-desktop bart% git checkout main
Switched to branch 'main'
Your branch is up to date with 'origin/main'.
bart-imac2018:pbs114a-desktop bart% git merge dev-powershell
Updating b029d25..8351b9c
Fast-forward
 index.html | 8 ++++++++
 1 file changed, 8 insertions(+)
bart-imac2018:pbs114a-desktop bart% git push
Total 0 (delta 0), reused 0 (delta 0)
To ../pbs114a-nas.git
   b029d25..8351b9c  main -> main
bart-imac2018:pbs114a-desktop bart%
```

## Automatically Pushing Tags

We've now created a new feature, so we should tag it. For reasons that will become obvious later, I am going to use an *annotated tag* (one that has both a name and a message):

```
git tag v2.10.0 -m 'Feat: Added PowerShell to the Hello World History'
```

As we learned in the previous instalment, we could now manually push the tag with `git push v2.10.0`, but I'd much rather have Git push tags automatically for me. As a personality profile one taught me, I *prefer economy of effort* after all 🙂

The key to having tags automatically pushed is the `--follow-tags` flag on the `git push` command. This flag will automatically push **some** tags (often the ones you want), but not all, so it's important to understand the caveats:

1. Only Annotated Tags get pushed
2. Only tags on commits on the current branch get pushed

What this means is that you need to get into the habit of annotating all important and/or long-term tags, and using un-annotated tags only for temporary local labels. I like to think of un-annotated tags as digital post-it notes — they're purely for my personal benefit, not for sharing, and they're ephemeral, that is to say, they're private and temporary.

So, to push any annotated tags that exist on the local branch but not on the tracking remote branch while pushing any other un-pushed changes, simply use:

```
git push --follow-tags
```

Having to remember this cumbersome flag hardly seems much of an improvement over having to remember to push each tag as you created it. Surely we can do better?

Thankfully we can — Git provides a config variable `push.followTags` which, if set, will cause `push` to always assume `--follow-tags`, unless you explicitly use the `--no-follow-tags` flag to override the new default.

You can set this option on your account, or, on a per-repository basis:

```
# set on just the current repository
git config --local push.followTags true

# set on your accunt
git config --global push.followTags true
```

Which ever option you choose to use, you can now push the new annotated `v2.10.0` tag with a simple `git push`:

```
bart-imac2018:pbs114a-desktop bart% git push
Enumerating objects: 1, done.
Counting objects: 100% (1/1), done.
Writing objects: 100% (1/1), 199 bytes | 199.00 KiB/s, done.
Total 1 (delta 0), reused 0 (delta 0)
To ../pbs114a-nas.git
 * [new tag]         v2.10.0 -> v2.10.0
bart-imac2018:pbs114a-desktop bart%
```

## Deleting a Tracking Branch

We've now finished our new feature — it's merged into `main`, and has been tagged with a version number. We should now clean up after ourselves and delete the `dev-powershell` branch, and we should do that both locally and on the `origin` remote.

Even if you have a tracking relationship established, **Git will never automatically delete a remote branch**, if you want to delete a remote branch, you always have to be explicit about it.

We already know we can delete local branches with the `--delete` or `-d` flags on the `git branch` command, so we can delete our local dev branch easily:

```
git branch -d dev-powershell
```

Now, we need to delete the remote branch, and perhaps confusingly, we do this using the `git push` command (not the `git branch` command like you might expect) with the `--delete` or `-d` flags. The command takes the following form:

```
git push REMOTE --delete BRANCH
```

Where `REMOTE` is the name of a remote, and `BRANCH` the name of a branch on that remote. So, in our case we want:

```
git push origin --delete dev-powershell
```


TO DO — git clone












### Tracking a NEW Remote Branch

To allow Git to push and pull without needing explicit branch names all the time we need to tell it which local branches match to which remote branches. The generic command to do this is:

```
git checkout -b LOCAL_BRANCH REMOTE/REMOTE_BRANCH
```

Where `LOCAL_BRANCH` is the name of a local branch (it can be a new branch), `REMOTE` is the name of the remote, and `REMOTE_BRANCH` is the name of the remote branch.

Note that if you choose, you can use different names for the local and remote branches. As a general rule, I advise against that, it often just leads to confusion, but there are times when that becomes useful. The only *real world* situation where I routines use different remote and local branch names is when collaboration with another person/organisation who's naming scheme is utterly different to mine/ours.

Because you almost always keep the two names the same, Git offers a convenient shortcut to help reduce repetitoin in commands, the `--track` flag. The following two commands mean exactly the same thing:

```
git checkout -b main origin/main
git checkout --track origin/main
```



## Auto-prune — MAYBE

## Final Thoughts

TO DO