# PBS 108 of X — More Branching

In the previous instalment we introduced the concept of a branching policy to guide your decisions on why to branch, when to branch, and how to merge your branches. We described a very simplistic initial branching policy for this series.

We learned how to create branches with `git branch`, and we learned that `git merge` supports two mechanisms for merging branches — full-on *merge commits*, and light-weight *fast forward merges*.

We implemented our branching policy by adding a `dev` branch to our example repo, adding a commit to that branch to fix a typo, and then using a fast-forward merge to bring that commit into the `main` branch.

In this instalment we'll take things a little further but using multiple commits on the `dev` branch to implement a feature, and then using a merge commit to bring only the final commit into the `main` branch, leaving the half-working intermedia commits to exist only on the `dev` branch.

## Matching Podcast Episode

TO DO

## Instalment Resources

* The instalment ZIP file — [pbs108.zip](https://github.com/bartificer/programming-by-stealth/raw/master/instalmentZips/pbs108.zip).

## Playing Along

If you're like to play along with the examples you'll need to download this instalment's ZIP file and unzip it. Open a terminal and change into the folder you extracted the ZIP into. You'll find a file in there named `pbs108a.bundle`, this is a bundled version of the repository we created in the previous instalment, with an additional commit added to update the references to the instalment number from 107 to 108.

Like we did in the previous two instalments, we need to make a new repository and import all the commits from the bundle. We'll name our new repository `pbs108a`. To create this new repo we'll take the following steps:

1. create a folder named `pbs108a`
2. change into that folder
3. initialise it as a Git repo
4. if needed, change the default branch from `master` to `main`
5. import all the commits from the bundle into our new repository

The commands to do all this are

```
mkdir pbs108a
cd pbs108a
git init
[ `git symbolic-ref --short HEAD` = 'master' ] && git checkout -b main
git pull ../pbs108a.bundle
```

## Two Useful Shortcuts

### Branch & Change

### Stage & Commit

## Adding a More Complex Feature — A Carousel

As a more real-world example, let's replace the list of *Hello World* code snippets with a sliding [Bootstrap Carousel](https://getbootstrap.com/docs/4.5/components/carousel/).

This will be a two-step process because we are currently only including the Bootstrap CSS in our page, not the Bootstrap JavaScript, and the Carousel component requires JavaScript.

Our first step will be to add support for Bootstrap JavaScript to our project, then, we'll convert the single large `<pre>` tag containing all the *Hello World* snippets to a carrousel, with one snippet per slide.

### Before We Start — Create Our `dev` Branch

Because our `dev` branch had nothing on it before I created the bundle it doesn't actually exit in our new repository, so let's make use of our new-discovered short-cut and create a new `dev` and check it out:

```
git checkout -b dev
```

### Adding Support for Bootstrap JS Features

To add support for Bootstrap's JS I had to add both Bootstrap's own JS file, and jQuery. I did that by adding the additional files into the `contrib` folder, and then updating the HTML to include the newly added files by adding the following to the bottom of the page body:

```html
<!-- Include the jQuery & Bootstrap JS Libraries -->
<script src="contrib/jQuery3.5/jquery.min.js"></script>
<script src="contrib/Bootstrap4.5/bootstrap.bundle.min.js"></script>
```

You'll find a copy of my updated `contrib` folder and html file in the folder `pbs108a-v2` in this instalment's ZIP file. Completely replace the `contrib` folder in your working copy with this folder, and replace the `index.html` file in your working copy with the one in the folder.

We can now commit these changes onto our `dev` branch using the short-cut to stage all change and commit in one command:

```
git commit -am 'chore: added Bootstrap JS support'
```

### Adding the Carousel

We're now ready to add the carousel by updating `index.html` as described in the Bootstrap docs.

I chose for a carousel with almost all the bells and whistles, adding navigation buttons, place indicators, and setting a custom animation time of 3 seconds.

You'll find the updated copy of `index.html` in the folder `pbs108a-v3` in this instalment's ZIP. Replace the html file in your working copy with this file.

We're now ready to commit our change:

```
git commit -am 'feat: added carousel for programming history in Hello Worlds'
```


## Final Thoughts

TO DO