---
title: Working with Submodules
instalment: 173
miniseries: Git
creators: [bart, allison]
date: 2024-11-09
---
In [the previous instalment](./pbs172) we learned about the concept of Git Submodules and we explored some common use cases to whet your appetite, but we didn't learn how to actually use them. In this instalment we'll take that next step, and simulate one of the common use cases — incorporating private shared code into multiple projects. **BART REWORD**

## Matching Podcast Episode

TO DO

## A Note on Default Git Security Settings

For security reasons, modern versions of Git prevent the use of file paths as Git URLs under some circumstances. Git commands where a human direcrly enters the file path URL are permitted, but when one Git command triggers others, the triggered commands can't use file path URLs.

When you run afowl of this security default you'll get an error like:

```text
fatal: transport 'file' not allowed
```

**In the real world** you're most likely to do working with genuinely remote repositories over SSH or HTTPS, so you're **not likely to encounter this problem**.

However, in order keep our worked examples in this isntalment self-contained, we need to use local folders to simulate remote repositorie, so, we will encounter this problem.

The Git setting that controls whether or not file URLs are permitted is `protocol.file.allow`, and it has three possible values:

1. `never` — regardless of context, don't allow file URLs
2. `user` — file URLs are allowed by direct user actions, but not indirectly, i.e. not within a triggered Git command. This is the default.
3. `always` — file URLS can be used in any context, i.e. for direct user actions, and, within any triggered Got commands.

### A Per-Command Exemption (Used in our Examples)

Git's security defaults were added for good reasons, so we want to make the minimal possible exception to faciliate our examples. Rather than setting the configuration globally, we'll set `protocol.file.allow` to `always` (direct and triggered commands) on a per-command basis, and only when we need to. This means that the moment our command and its triggered commands finish, the exception will disappear.

The mechanism for doing this is Git's  `-c` option for passing a value for any configuration variable at run time, the option takles the form `-c NAME_OF_SETTING=VALUE`, so to enable file URLs in all contexts we need to add the following to any Git commands that trigger other Git commands:

```
-c protocol.file.allow=always
```

### A Permanent Excemption (Only use if you Regularly use File Path URLs)

It's possible that you want to use submodules in an environment where file-based URLs are the norm. The only realistic example I cna think if would be an organisation that hosts its Git repositores on a shared folder that gets mapped as a drive on developer PCs. In such a scenario, you probably want to make a permanent exception, which you can do by updating Git's configiration for the current user with the command `git config --global` command:

```sh
# WARNING - THIS ADDS A PERMANENT SECURITY EXCEPTION
git config --global protocol.file.allow always
```

But remember, this is not recommended!

## Our Overall Scenario — A Small Web App Business

To explore Git submodules we're going to pretend to be a fledgeling business that builds web apps, all of which share the company's branding.

To keep things consistent across current and future apps, the branding is versioned in its own private Git repository named `pbscorp-brand`. Each web app has its own repo, with names like `pbscorp-app1`.  The app repos link the brand repo in as a git submodule.

To play along, start by downloading the instalment ZIP file, extracting it, and opening a terminal in the extracted folder, and executing the initialisation script `initPBS173Demo.sh` with the commands:

```sh
chmod +x *.sh; ./initPBS173Demo.sh
```

This script does the following:

1. Creates parent folders to simulate Git repositories on different computers: 
   1. `remote-repos` to represent the company's GIT server
   2. `pc-app1Dev` to represent the PC of a newly hired developer who's just been assigned to app 1
   3. `pc-app2Dev` to represent the PC of a developer tasked with creating the brand-new app 2
   4. `pc-brandDesigner` to represent the PC of a designer tasked with maintaining the brand
2. Expands the bundled repos `pbscorp-brand.bundle` and `pbscorp-app1.bundle` into the repositories `pbscorp-brand` & `pbscorp-app1` in the `remote-repos` folder

## Scenario 1 — Cloning a Repo with Submodules (New Developer Joins App 1 Team)

Your most likely first introduction to submodules will likely be cloning an existing repository that makes use of them, maybe in work, or maybe some open source code. Without a basic introduction to submodules, this can be a very frustrating experience, because, at first glance, it will appear the code in the repository is broken! But don't worry, just a few simple Git commands will get things running smoothly for you.

In our imagined scenario we are a developer who has just joined the team working on App 1, so we want to clone it to our computer. If you'd like to play along, please change into the `pc-app1Dev` folder.

In the real world, the URL for the repository we wish to clone that happens to use submodules will most likely be a genuinely remote repository that we connect to over SSH or HTTPS, but in our example, we'll use a simple relative file path as the URL, specifically, we'll use `../remote-repos/pbscorp-app1.git`.

We can clone the repo as normal with the command (remember to make sure you are in the `pc-app1Dev` folder):

```sh
git clone ../remote-repos/pbscorp-app1.git
```

This command will appear to clone the repository without issue, and at first glance, all seems well. When you look inside the repo you've just cloned, you'll see a file named `index.html`, and a folder named `brand`. But, if you open `index.html` in your favourite browser you might notice that the app looks like an un-styled Bootstrap 5 app, and if you open the JavaScript console you'll see an error to the effect that `brand/style.css` could not be found. This is our first clue that our submodule has not been initialised.

Before we resolve our issue, let's explore this repo a little more so we can learn how to tell we have an incomplete clone with uninitialised submodules. Start by changing into the newly cloned repo with the command:

```sh
cd pbscorp-app1
```

You might imagine running `git status` to see the state of the repos would show us we have a problem, but it would not, it simply outputs:

```text
On branch main
Your branch is up to date with 'origin/main'.

nothing to commit, working tree clean
```

However, there are two ways we can tell our newly cloned repo uses submodules. First, at a simple file system level, any repo that uses submodules will contain a file named `.gitmodules`. If you view the contents of this file you'll see that it contains the mappings between the folder names and repo URLs for all the submodules that have been added to the repo, as we can see by running the command:

```sh
cat .gitmodules
```

In our case, this outputs the details for just one submodule:

```text
[submodule "brand"]
	path = brand
	url = ../../remote-repos/pbscorp-brand.git
```

We can also see that there is a submodule, what folder it is linked to, and which remote commit our currently checked out branch specifies for the submodule with the command:

```sh
git submodule status
```

In our case this shows:

```text
-4e4c1243d73d16db9c331f88eab907cc8a4b61eb brand
```

Again, this tells us the folder `brand` is a submodule.

OK, so how do we get the `brand` folder populated?

The first step is to tell Git to integrate the submodules specified in the `.gitmodules` into its database in the `.git` folder with the command:

```sh
git submodule init
```

This will show Git registering one submodule, and resolving the URL to a full path, for me, the output was:

```text
Submodule 'brand' (/Users/bart/Documents/Temp/From GitHub/programming-by-stealth/instalmentResources/pbs173/pc-app1Dev/../remote-repos/pbscorp-brand) registered for path 'brand'
```

You might imagine initialising the submodule would clone it into the `brand` folder, but alas, no, the folder is still empty. To actually fetch the correct commit from the submodule's repo you need to run the command:

```sh
git submodule update
```

When working with truly remote repos this will work, but as explained earlier, for security reasons, we need to explicitly tell Git we are OK with relative file URLs for our submodules by adding a configuration option to that effect, so, for us, the command becomes:

```sh
git -c protocol.file.allow=always submodule update
```

Now you should see the submodule being cloned and the appropriate commit checked out into the `brand` folder. For me the output was:

```text
Cloning into '/Users/bart/Documents/Temp/From GitHub/programming-by-stealth/instalmentResources/pbs173/pc-app1Dev/pbscorp-app1/brand'...
done.
Submodule path 'brand': checked out '4e4c1243d73d16db9c331f88eab907cc8a4b61eb'
```

Note the ID of the checked out commit matches the output from `git submodule status` earlier.

Re-load `index.html` in your browser and you should see the error go away, and the app adopt its corporate branding.

## Scenario 2 — Adding a Submodule to a Repo (Starting App 2)

We're now going to pretend to be a different developer, one who's responsible for starting app 2. The PBS Corp sysadmins have done their work, and there is an empty git repository waiting to be filled with code!

To play along, start by changing into the folder representing this developer's PC — `pc-app2Dev`.

From that folder, start by cloning the remote repo for App 2:

```sh
git clone ../remote-repos/pbscorp-app2.git
```

Create an  `index.html` with the initial code for the app from the demo file `pbscorp-app2-index-1.html`:

```sh
cp ../../pbscorp-app2-index-1.html ./index.html
```

Commit this initial version and push it up-stream to the *'remote'* repo:

```sh
git add index.html
git commit -m "Feat: initial implementation"
git push
```

If you open `index.html` in your browser you'll see that we now have a working silly little web app counting down to Christmas. Apart from the baseline Boostrap 5 styles, it's completely un-styled, it's missing the PBS Corp brand, so let's add it with a submodule!

Our company brand is available in the Git repo `pbscorp-brand`, and we'd like to include it in our repo in a folder simply named `brand`.

The git command to add a submodule is `git submodule add`, and it requires at least one argument — the URL for the remote repo. By default the base name of the remote repostitory (the last part of the URL with the `.git` extension removed if present) is used as the folder name, but you can override that with an optional second argument. That means the basic form of the command is:

```sh
git submodule add REMOTE_REPO_URL [LOCAL_FOLDER_PATH]
```

Before we do anything, note that there is no file in our repo named `.gitmodules`, and the `git submodule` command returns nothing:

```sh
cat .gitsubmodules
# cat: .gitsubmodules: No such file or directory

git submodule
# returns no output at all
```

OK, let's now add the brand to our repo as a submodule.

For our purposeses the URL to our *'remote'* repo is `../../remote-repos/pbscorp-brand.git`, so the default folder name within our repo would be `pbscorp-brand`. Since we want the repo cloned into in a folder named `brand` instead, we'll need supply the optional second argument:

```sh
git submodule add ../../remote-repos/pbscorp-brand.git brand
```

This will fail purely because we are using a file path as a URL without explicitly telling Git that we're OK with that, so, let's add the Git configuration variable to enable file paths and try again:

```sh
git -c protocol.file.allow=always submodule add ../../remote-repos/pbscorp-brand.git brand
```

You'll see that this clones the remote repo into the brand folder. I'd like to draw your attention to a few things:

1. There is now a file named `.gitsubmodules` in the root of the repo, and it maps our remote URL to the folder `brand`:

   ```sh
   cat .gitmodules 
   # [submodule "brand"]
   #         path = brand
   #         url = ../../remote-repos/pbscorp-brand.git
   ```

2. The `git submodule` command now lists one submodule:

   ```sh
   git submodule
   # 4e4c1243d73d16db9c331f88eab907cc8a4b61eb brand (heads/main)
   ```

   Note that it shows the ID of the curreltly checked out commit, then the name of the folder, then the remote branch checked out.

3. The submodule has been cloned, so the stylesheet is there:

   ```sh
   ls brand
   # style.css
   ```

By adding a submodule, we have made a change to the `pbscorp-app2` repo, but we have not committed it yet. Before we do any more, let's get the state of our repo with `git status`, and what it shows is:

```text
On branch main
Your branch is up to date with 'origin/main'.

Changes to be committed:
  (use "git restore --staged <file>..." to unstage)
        new file:   .gitmodules
        new file:   brand
```

I'd like to draw your attention to three things:

1. The changes were automatially staged, we did not need to use `git add` to stage them.
2. The `.gitmodules` file is versioned in Git just like the `.gitignore` file is.
3. The entire submodule is presented as a single *'file'* with the folder's name.

Before we go any further, let's commit these changes:

```sh
git commit -m 'Feat: add the corporate brand as a submodule'
```

We can now enable the corporate brand by editing `index.html` to include the stylesheet `brand/style.css`. The line to add is simply:

```html
<link rel="stylesheet" href="./brand/style.css">
```

But you'll find the full updated file in the instalment zip as `pbscorp-app2-index-2.html`, and you can copy it over your current file with:

```sh
cp ../../pbscorp-app2-index-2.html ./index.html
```

Now, when we open `index.html` in our browser we see the corproate brand has been applied.

## Scenario 3 — Pulling Submodule Changes (Updating the Brand)

TO DO — LEFT OFF HERE

NOTE — REMEMBER TO STRESS THAT INSIDE /brand IT IS A REGULAR GIT REPO

## EPISODE BREAK ??? Scenario 4 — Pushing Submodule changes (Extending the Brand from App 2)



## Scenario 5 — Branching with Submodules (Testing a Brand Change)





## Final Thoughts

TO DO
