---
title: CSS 'Variables'
instalment: 182
creators: [bart, allison]
date: 2026-04-11
---

*Cascading Style Sheets*, or CSS, was among the very first technologies this series covered, starting way back in [instalment 6](./pbs6), and by [instalment 10](./pbs10) we'd pretty finished with the topic. The only other mention of the CSS in an instalment title is [PBS 28](./pbs28). We Learned the fundamentals of how CSS's works, and more importantly, why it's important to use CSS to separate the look of web apps and web sites from their semantic structure, which is expressed in HTML.

Because our exploration of CSS never went beyond the basics, we never covered the more advanced features like so-called *CSS Variables*. Until Bootstrap 5.3 made it impossible to achieve certain customisations without CSS variables, we'd never encountered a need to learn about how they work, so we've never taken the time to revisit CSS to expand our basic understanding.

To prepare us for learning how to customise Bootstrap, we'll finally explore the basics of CSS Variables.

## Matching Podcast Episode

TO DO

## Instalment Resources

- The instalment ZIP file — [pbs182.zip](./assets/pbs182.zip) — TO UPDATE

## Reminder — CSS Basics

CSS style sheets define how HTML content should be rendered — the sizes of things, the typography, the colours, the arranged and spacing of the various elements on the page, the borders to be added to the various elements, and so on.

The fundamental building blocks of CSS are:

1. **Style Declarations** — definitions for *style properties* applied to different parts of the page using *selectors*
2. **Style Properties** — every HTML element on a page has a list of specific pieces of relevant style information associated with it, these are the properties CSS can alter. For example, the element's colour, the type face to be used any text within the element, how much padding there should be around the element, and so on.
3. **Selectors** — a syntax for expressing the set of elements style declarations apply to, e.g. `p` applies declarations to all paragraphs, `#waffle` applies declarations to just the element with the ID `waffles`, and `p.pancakes` applies declarations to all paragraphs with the *class* `pancakes`.

These building blocks are applied to HTML pages following two fundamental principles:

1. Unless explicitly blocked, **style declarations cascade** into nested HTML elements.
2. Given how declarations cascade and how CSS is used, it's inevitable that there will be competing possible values for many style properties — there are well defined rules of **precedence** for CSS selectors, and this are used to resolve conflicts and assign a single specific values to each style property in each element.

## The Problem to be Solved

The feature colloquially referred as *CSS variables* was added to CSS to solve a common problem that we have been side-stepping by using Bootstrap's default style for all our web apps. We have been relying on Bootstrap CSS classes for ensuring consistency of colours, typography, spacing, and so on. We have not need to care about how using Boostrap's various `*-success` CSS classes ensure the same shade of green is always used for thing that succeed, or the `*-warning` classes for all types of warning messages, and so on. But were we to have been developing our own custom styles for each app we would have face this problem many times.

For example, were we to have chosen to use the Green from the Bartificer Creations logo for success we would have had tens or perhaps even hundreds of style decorations that align `#TODO` to various selectors. That's a meaningless number, making the CSS statements difficult to debug! Worse still, experimenting with different colour pallets would be very tedious because we would need to find-and-replace one meaningless value with another all over our code.

Clearly, there is a need for **named, re-usable values** within CSS style declarations!

## How CSS Implements 'Variables' — CSS Custom Properties

CSS is not a programming language in the traditional sense. You do not execute CSS code to achieve tasks, it's a kind of markup language for defining how HTML content should look, so it's not surprising that *variables* in CSS are not really variables at all.

The way CSS implements the concept of custom names values is by allowing users to invent their own style properties and assign values for those properties to elements using standard CSS selectors. These values just exist and have a name, but do not directly affect the look of the page. This implementation explains why these custom name-value pairs are not officially defined as *variables* in the documentation, but as *Custom Properties*.

This distinction matters, because unlike traditional variables, custom CSS properties don't have a single value within a document, their value can vary from element to element in the same way different parts of a page can have different colours because their matching elements have different values for the `color` property.

## Using CSS Custom Properties

The CSS specification actually defines two related mechanisms for defining custom properties, a simpler one that's sufficient for many situations, and a more complex but powerful optional additional mechanism.

### Custom CSS Property Names

Like with traditional variables, there are rules around how CSS properties can be named.

The rules are simply:

1. Must start with two dashes, i.e. `--`
2. Must follow all the same rules as traditional CSS property names like `background-color`.

In effect that means dash-delimited names of the form `--my-variable-name`.

### Assigning and Using Custom CSS Property Values

Other than their funny names, you assign values to custom properties just like you would for the traditional CSS properties, using style declarations.

To set the `color` property to `DarkBlue` for all top-level headers you would use:

```css
h1 {
  color: DarkBlue;
}
```

Similarly, you can set the value for the custom property `--pbs-logo-color` to `#00408d` on every top-level heading you would use:

```css
h1 {
  --pbs-logo-color: #00408d;
}
```

If you choose to do this, the custom property `--pbs-logo-color` will **only** have a value on `<h1>` tags and any elements inside `<h1>` tags. In other words, the value gets directly assigned on all `<h1>` tags and then *cascades* down into any tags within `<h1>` tags.

There are times you want to make these kind of fine-grain *'variable'* assignments, but that's not the most common problem-to-be-solved. What you're much more likely to want to do is assign a value at the document level, so that one definition cascades into each and every element on the page.

CSS defines a special selector that represents the document as a whole, `:root`, so to assign the value `#00408d` to the custom property `--pbs-logo-color` on all elements we would use:

```css
:root {
  --pbs-logo-color: #00408d;
}
```

We now have a named value of our choosing available within every element, but by definition, custom properties **have no effect on rendering of an element**. At first glance that might sound like custom properties are useless, since they don't affect the style, but that's obviously not the case.

Drawing on our experience with traditional variables, what we've done here is analogous to declaring a Javascript variable but never using it. Just like `x=1;` doesn't really **do** anything until we use access the variables value from within another statement, css custom properties don't affect the page until their value is accessed within another style declaration.

CSS provides a function for accessing the value of a custom property, `var()`. You can use `var()` as a value in a regular style declaration, for example, `color: var(--pbs-logo-color)`. You must always provide a custom property name to `var()`, but you can optionally pass a second argument, a fallback value to use when the custom property has no value, e.g. `color: var(--pobs-logo-color, Black)`.

To see how to use the kind of *'global variable'* we've just defined, let's extend our code to use the value we stored in the `--pbs-logo-color` custom property in selectors to:

1. Set the colour of all headings to the logo colour
2. Set the background of all buttons to the logo colour, and the text on all buttons to white

Here's the updated CSS code:

```css
/* set the PBS logo color for the entire document */
:root {
  --pbs-logo-color: #00408d;
}

/* set the colour of all headings to the logo colour */
h1, h2, h3, h4, h5, h6{
  color: var(--pbs-logo-color);
}

/* set text colour of buttons to white, and the background colour to the logo colour */
button {
  color: white;
  background-color: var(--pbs-logo-color);
}
```

### Advanced Custom Property Definitions with `@property` — Optional

Most people will never find themselves needing `@property` definitions, but they are useful to know about, and you may prefer their more explicit approach to defining your custom properties.

The syntax for `@property` definitions will look a little unusual because it is an example of an entire sub-set of advanced CSS features named *at-rules* that we have completely ignored in this series to date.

Unlike style definitions, at-rules work at the global level, rather than the element level. They are used for all sorts of advanced features, one of which is formally defining custom properties.

To define a custom property with this syntax use a definition of the form:

```css
@property --my-property-name {
  syntax: "A VALID TYPE DEFINITION";
  inherits: true; /* or false */
  initial-value: "SOME VALUE"; /* optional */
}
```

The `initial-value` property acts as a default value, ensuring there at least **a** value for the custom property in every element.

The `inherits` property use used to define whether or not the property cascades. By default, almost all CSS properties cascade, including custom properties. If you want to prevent your property from cascading, you can use an `@property` definition with `inherits` set to `false`.

The `syntax` property allows you to define the valid types for the values assigned to your custom property. Any style directives assigning invalid values will then be ignored. You can use this to stop accidental mistakes causing spooky action at a distance.

The full set of rules for the `syntax` property is surprisingly complex, allow a lot of advanced usages, so we'll constrain ourselves to the following simple subset:

- `syntax: "*"` — accept any value

- LEFT OFF HERE!!!



## Worked Example — Including Custom Property Cascading

TO DO

## Useful Links

- The Mozilla Developer Network (MDN) Custom Properties overview — [developer.mozilla.org/…](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Guides/Cascading_variables/Using_custom_properties)
- The MDN `@property` docs — [developer.mozilla.org/…](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Reference/At-rules/@property)
- The MDN docs on the `syntax` directive within `@property` declarations — [developer.mozilla.org/…](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Reference/At-rules/@property/syntax)

## A challenge

TO DO

## Final Thoughts

TO DO
