---
title: Deploying a JavaScript Web App with Webpack & GitHub Actions
instalment: 176
miniseries: GitHub Pages
creators: [bart, allison]
date: 2025-02-01
---
[The previous instalment](./pbs175) was a very high-level overview of [GitHub Pages](https://pages.github.com), and an attempt to whet your appetite for learning more. In this instalment we get into the meat of our exploration of GitHub Pages. And we're going to start by looking back slightly and closing a circle we've left open for some time. Most of the broader Programming by Stealth series has focused on learning client-side web technologies, culminating in building client-side web apps with HTML, CSS & Javascript that utilise popular third-party libraries like [jQuery](https://jquery.com), [Bootstrap](https://getbootstrap.com), and [Mustache](https://github.com/janl/mustache.js). Then we broadened our focus a little to look at some tools used to facilitate the development of more complex apps like [Git](https://git-scm.com) for source control, [NodeJS](https://nodejs.org/en) + [NPM](https://www.npmjs.com) for package management, [ES Lint](https://eslint.org) for flagging poor coding practices, [JS Doc](https://jsdoc.app) and [Mermaid](https://mermaid.js.org) for documenting our work, [Jest](https://jestjs.io) for testing our code, and finally [Webpack](https://webpack.js.org) for bundling our code for distribution. Along we way we also took some detours into more coding-adjacent areas like [Chezmoi](https://www.chezmoi.io) for managing configuration files for our command line tools in Git, the ubiquitous [Bash](https://www.gnu.org/software/bash/) for shell scripting, [jq](https://jqlang.org) for processing [JSON](https://www.json.org/json-en.html), [YAML](https://yaml.org) for simple data markup, and we even dipped our toes in some software engineering with a look at the [MVC](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Model–view–controller) design pattern.

With all those diversions, the last web app we built as a worked example was actually in [instalment 138](./pbs138), just as we'd learned to bundle our code ready for publishing to the web with Webpack. But that's where we stopped — figuring out how to actually publish our apps to the internet was left as an exercise for the reader! Well, not anymore!

In this instalment we'll learn how to use GitHub Pages to publish our bundled client-side web apps to the internet for free.

What's more, we're going to leverage GitHub's powerful [CI/CD](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CI/CD) (*Continuous Integration/Continuous Deployment*) tool [GitHub Actions](https://github.com/features/actions) to automate the process.

We've mentioned CI/CD in passing in a few recent instalments, but only in very vague hand-waving terms. In this instalment we're finally going to dive in and implement a simple CI/CD pipeline with GitHub Actions to automatically publish the latest version of an example client-side web app to the internet each time updated code is pushed to the `main` branch using GitHub Pages.

## Matching Podcast Episode

TO DO

## Instalment Resources

- The instalment ZIP file — [pbs176.zip](./assets/pbs176.zip)

## What is CI/CD (Continuous Integration/Continuous Deployment)?

At a philosophical level CI/CD is a model of software development where sporadic *big bang* releases are spurned in favour of a continuous stream of frequently deployed small iterative changes. The key to adopting this development mind-set is automation, and that's where CI/CD intersects with tools like GitHub. If you want to frequently deploy updated web apps, the process can't be manual and laborious, instead, it must be automated. To realise the CI/CD mindset code management platform like GitHub have developed systems for automations that are triggered by Git actions, like commits or pull requests.

In the broader world of software development CI/CD pipelines are often used to perform tasks like:

1. Automatically running a test suite against every commit or every pull request
2. Automatically applying a linter like ESLint to all source files on every commit
3. Automatically deploying code to a staging server on every commit to a specific branch
4. Automatically deploying production code on every commit to the default branch

For our purposes in this series we're going to confine ourselves to that last use-case, automating the deployment of a website each time changes are pushed to a repository's default branch.

> If you're interested in learning more about CI/CD, [the Wikipedia article on the topic](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CI/CD) is a good starting point.
{: .aside}

## Introducing GitHub Actions

GitHub implements CI/CD pipelines with its [GitHub Actions](https://github.com/features/actions) feature.

Believe it or not, each time a GitHub action is triggered, GitHub creates a new virtual machine (VM) in the cloud, runs the action, and then deletes that virtual machine! This is only possible because of the magic of containerisation, which allows for extremely efficient creation and destruction of VMs.

### GitHub Actions Terminology

The GitHub docs have [a nice overview page for how GitHub Actions work](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/about-github-actions/understanding-github-actions), but the key concepts are quite simple:

1. Individual CI/CD pipelines are referred to as **workflows**.
2. Workflows are comprised of one or more **jobs**, each of which is a sequence of **steps**.
3. Workflows are triggered by what are referred to as **events**, these are actions performed on a GitHub repository.
4. Workflows run on virtual machines referred to as **runners**, and as of January 2025 those can be Ubuntu Linux, Windows, or macOS VMs.

### Defining Workflows

Workflows are defined using YAML files in a special folder, specifically `.github/workflows`. There is an entire section of the GitHub docs dedicated to [writing workflows](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/writing-workflows).

A GitHub workflow definition consists of **YAML file defining a single top-level dictionary** with keys for the different aspects of a workflow.

The most important top-level workflow keys are:

| Workflow Key  | Type                      | Description                                                  |
| ------------- | ------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
| `name`        | String (**Recommended**)  | The human-friendly name for the Workflow in the GitHub user interface. |
| `on`          | Dictionary (**Required**) | The event or events that should trigger the workflow.        |
| `jobs`        | Dictionary (**Required**) | A dictionary defining the jobs the workflow contains. The keys for this dictionary are the alphanumeric IDs of your own choosing, and the values are dictionaries defining the jobs themselves. |
| `permissions` |                           | A dictionary defining default permissions for all the jobs in the workflow. The keys are permission names, and the values are permission levels, one of `none`, `read` or `write`  (`write` includes `read`). For more details see [the Permissions section of the documentation](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/writing-workflows/workflow-syntax-for-github-actions#permissions). |
| `env`         | Dictionary (**Optional**) | A dictionary defining environment variables that will be made available within all jobs defined in the workflow. |

In terms of triggers, we're going to keep things very simple in this series, and trigger out jobs when commits are pushed to the default branch, so we'll always use the following configuration:

```yaml
on:
	push:
		branches: [ "main" ]
```

If you want to add additional triggers to your workflows, there is an entire section of the GitHub documentation dedicated to [triggering workflows](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/writing-workflows/choosing-when-your-workflow-runs).

This takes us to the most complex of the top-level keys, `jobs`. The definition for a job is itself a dictionary, with the following being the most important supported keys:

| Job Key       | Type                                                         | Description                                                  |
| ------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
| `name`        | String (**Recommended**)                                     | A human-friendly name for the job.                           |
| `needs`       | String or array of Strings (**Optional**)                    | If a job needs one or more jobs to successfully complete before it can start, set this key to a single job ID, or an array with multiple job IDs. |
| `runs-on`     | Can be a String, but more complex definitions are possible (**Required**) | The type of VM the job should be run on.                     |
| `steps`       | Array of Dictionaries (**Required**)                         | An array of dictionaries, each defining a step. The steps will be executed in order. |
| `permissions` | Dictionary (**Optional**)                                    | A dictionary defining permissions for the job. The syntax is the same as for the workflow-level `permissions` key described in the previous table. |
| `env`         | Dictionary (**Optional**)                                    | A dictionary defining environment variables that will be made available within all steps defined in the job. |

Again, we're going to keep things simple in this series, so we're always going to use Linux runners, so our `runs-on` definition will always be `runs-on: ubuntu-latest`.

Finally, we get to the real meat of workflows, the steps that make up a job. Each step is yet another dictionary, with the most important keys being:

| Step Key | Type                      | Description                                                  |
| -------- | ------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
| `name`   | String (**Recommended**)  | A human-friendly name for the step.                          |
| `run`    | String                    | One or more shell commands to execute. To run multiple commands, use a multi-line string. *Use this key **or** `using`, not both!* |
| `uses`   | String                    | A valid specifier for a pre-defined action to execute with an optional but strongly recommended version number. See the documentation for [descriptions of the supported specifiers](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/writing-workflows/workflow-syntax-for-github-actions#jobsjob_idstepsuses). You can find a [listing of pre-defined actions in the GitHub market place](https://github.com/marketplace?type=actions). *Use this key **or** `run`, not both!* |
| `with`   | Dictionary                | This key provides a mechanism for passing arguments to a predefined action included via the `uses` key. The details are entirely determined by the included action, so you'll need to read that action's documentation to know what keys the action supports. *Only use this key with `uses`!* |
| `env`    | Dictionary (**Optional**) | A dictionary defining environment variables that will be made available within just this step. |

## Worked Example 1 — Manually Publishing a WebPack-Bundled Web App on GitHub Pages

As we learned in instalments [138](./pbs138) & [139](./pbs139), to publish a web app bundled with WebPack we need to use NodeJS to import the JavaScript libraries we want to use, and then to run the WebPack command. For consistency we'll be sticking with the directory structure we used for our worked examples in those instalments, that is to say:

| File/Folder    | Description                                   |
| -------------- | --------------------------------------------- |
| `src/*`        | The source code for our web app.              |
| `docs/*`       | The built web app.                            |
| `package.json` | The NodeJS/NPM configuration for our web app. |

Rather than building a fresh example, we'll re-use the final example web app from instalment [139](./pbs139).

### Step 1 — Create a new Public GitHub Repository & Clone It Locally

Log in to GitHub and [create a new repository in the usual way](https://docs.github.com/en/repositories/creating-and-managing-repositories/creating-a-new-repository). If you want to be able to experiment with GitHub Actions and GitHub Pages for **free** you'll need to make it a **public repository**.

Once you've created your example repository, clone it to your personal computer as you usually would, and open a command prompt in that folder.

### Step 2 — Add the Web App Code & NodeJS/NPM Configuration

Extract the contents of the Instalment ZIP file and copy all the files and folders into your cloned repo. Rename the file `_gitignore` to `.gitignore` and then commit everything as the initial code.

### Step 3 — Manually Build the App & Commit the Web App

With the initial code committed, let's manually build the web app so we can see what it is we are trying to automate. Before continuing, **make sure you have the latest NodeJS installed** (or at least the latest LTS version)!

On the command prompt you have open in your cloned copy of the repo, start by initialising NodeJS in the repo with the command:

```sh
npm ci
```

_**Reminder:** this command does a 'clean install', downloading the exact versions of the each package listed as required in `package.json` as recorded in `package-lock.json`._

Now, let's try build our web app with command:

```sh
npm run build
```

This will build our web app using the source code in `/src` as specified by the Webpack configuration in `webpack.config.js` using the build command defined in `package.json` and publish it to `docs/index.html`.

Refresh your browser and you should see the placeholder has been replaced with the same dummy web app we built at the end of instalment 139.

Commit the changes and then push them up to GitHub.

### Step 3 — Enable GitHub Pages

Log in to the GitHub web interface and open the repo's GitHub Pages settings (**Settings** → **Pages**).

Change the **Source** dropdown to **Deploy from a branch**, choose **main** and the folder **/docs**, then hit **Save**.

After you save the settings, Choose **Actions** from the button bar to see all the actions on your repo. An action will have been created for you named **pages build and deployment**, and depending on how quickly you navigated your will see it's status as *queued* or *running* or it will have a green tick mark indicating it has completed. Click on the workflow's name to see the details of the last run, the depoly step will  show the URL your app was published to. 

Open the URL shown in the workflow output in your browser to verify that you have successfully published your web app to the internet!

## Worked Example 2 — Automate Deployment of a Webpack App with GitHub Actions

Now that we can publish our app manually, let's automate it with GitHub Actions.

To do this we'll be making use of a collection of officially verified standard actions from [the market place](https://github.com/marketplace?verification=verified_creator&type=actions), and using a `run` step to execute our two NPM commands (`npm ci` & `npm run build`). 

>  It's important not to use an action from an un-trusted author, so I always set the **By** filter all my search results to **Verified Creators**.
> {: .notice}

### Step 1 — Update GitHub Pages Settings to Use a GitHub Actions Workflow

Log back in to the GitHub web interface and open the GitHub Pages settings again. Change the **Source** dropdown to **GitHub Actions** and choose to create your own action. This will open a GitHub web editor with a default file as the content.

Enter a sensible filename with a `.yaml` extension, e.g. `deploy-app.yaml`.

For the file's contents, enter the following

```yaml
name: Build with Webpack and Publish to GitHub Pages

on:
  push:
    branches: [ "main" ]

jobs:
  build:
    permissions:
      contents: read

    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    steps:
    - name: Checkout code
      uses: actions/checkout@v4

    - name: Setup NodeJS
      uses: actions/setup-node@v4
      with:
        node-version: 22.x

    - name: Build with Webpack
      run: |
        npm ci
        npx webpack

    - name: Upload generated files as artifact
      uses: actions/upload-pages-artifact@v3
      with:
        path: docs/

  deploy:
    needs: build

    permissions:
      pages: write
      id-token: write

    environment:
      name: github-pages
      url: ${{ steps.deployment.outputs.page_url }}

    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    steps:
    - name: Deploy to GitHub Pages
      uses: actions/deploy-pages@v4
```

This YAML code defines a **workflow** with two **jobs**, one with the id `build` and one with the id `deploy`. The workflow is triggered by pushing to `main` and both jobs are configured to run on Linux runners (`runs-on: unbuntu-latest`). Note that the `deploy` job forces itself to run after the `build` job with `needs: build`.

The `build` job executes **steps** to:

1. Check out the code from the commit that triggered the workflow run using the [standard checkout action](https://github.com/marketplace/actions/checkout).
2. Set up NodeJS version 22.x in the runner using the [standard Node.JS Setup action](https://github.com/marketplace/actions/setup-node-js-environment).
3. Build the web app by running the appropriate `npm` commands.
4. Upload the generated site to the GitHub Pages Servers as a so-called *artefact* using the [standard Upload Pages Artefact action](https://github.com/actions/upload-pages-artifact).

With the generated files now uploaded as an artefact, the `deploy` job executes just one **step** to:

1. Publish the uploaded artefact to the internet using the [standard Deploy Pages action](https://github.com/marketplace/actions/deploy-github-pages-site).

### Step 2 — Clean up and Test the Automated Deployment

Now that we are building our GitHub Pages output in a temporary virtual machine instead of committing it to the positron in the `docs` folder we can remove the docs folder. Committing that change would trigger a re-build, but it would not change the look of the site, so for a more obvious test, let's make two changes:

1. Delete the `docs` folder.

2. Edit update line 27 of `src/index.js` to:

   ```js
   $('#world-modifier').text('Automated Webpack');
   ```

With that done, commit and push all changes and watch the action run on the GitHub web interface before refreshing your web browser to verify the website has been updated.

## Final Thoughts

We've now seen a real CI/CD pipeline in action, and we've learned how we can start to publish our client-side web apps to the world. This could prove useful for some coding projects you may end up working on, but there is another reason for covering this concept in this series — this is the mechanism by which the new JavaScript-based version of the XKPasswd secure memorable password generator developed by member of the PBS community will be deployed when it comes out of beta in early 2025!

In this instalment we've seen how GitHub Pages can be used to publish a web app rather than a website. For the remainder of our journey into GitHub Pages we've going to be looking at how to use GitHub Pages as a content management system for publishing websites. In this instalment we replaced GitHub Pages' default build process with a custom CI/CD workflow or our own that used NodeJS and Webpack to transform source files into a website. From now on we'll be using GitHub Pages' default publishing pipeline which uses a different tool, the Jekyll Static Site Generator. We'll still be using the Actions page on the GitHub site to monitor our deployments, but the workflows we'll be watching will be standard ones managed by GitHub's own developers. It's important to know though that those workflows work in just the same way our custom one did, they too are defined in YAML files using a combination of raw terminal commands and published pre-created workflow actions.
